A /72/PV.105

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

105th plenary meeting

Monday, 2 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Razafitrimo
(Madagascar), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/884)
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
Chilean delegation would like to express special thanks
to the delegations of Australia and Ghana today for
their efforts and dedication. It is their commitment that
has led us to hold this debate in the General Assembly.
Chile supported the recommendation to include the
responsibility to protect as an item on the Assembly’s
agenda. We also called for respect for the work of the
Organization itself in the framework of its principles
and prerogatives, with the aim of according priority
to the rights of victims and ensuring their dignity;
putting an end to impunity; promoting the participation
of civil society and local communities, among
other stakeholders; and enhancing strategic United
Nations communication in the interest of achieving
greater transparency.
We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s most
recent report on the issue, entitled “Responsibility to
protect: from early warning to early action” (A/72/884),
and highlight the fact that his recommendations

dovetail with the other major processes under way in
our Organization. We believe that this is an excellent
opportunity for us all to throw our weight behind
the responsibility to protect from the perspective of
prevention, given that we are now in the middle of a
reform process. In addition, we must work to construct
and promote resilient and cohesive societies.
In this context, we would like to strongly emphasize,
as the Secretary-General does in his report, the
important role of women in the prevention of atrocity
crimes, since it can be a key element in early-warning
and peacebuilding processes as well as in promoting
cooperation, capacity-building and support networks at
the local, regional and international levels.
Likewise, we are convinced that a united effort on
the part of the United Nations and the strengthening
of multilateralism are the most effective tools we have
for the maintenance of order, peace and international
security and, in the specific case of the responsibility
to protect, for preventing failed decision-making from
scarring humankind forever.
We know we cannot rewrite history, but we can
learn from it. Our collective actions regarding the
responsibility to protect must go hand in hand with
reliable and timely information, so that the decisions
we take are responsible, transparent and focused on
a single objective, which is the ethical imperative of
protecting people from the four atrocity crimes covered
by the responsibility to protect.
Mr. Raum (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): My
delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-20585 (E)

*1820585*

A/72/PV.105

by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/72/PV.99).
We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the operationalization of the responsibility to protect
(A/72/884). We share the view that the transition from
early warning to early action is a collective pledge of
our willingness to act so that the analysis and earlywarning mechanisms put in place in recent years can
achieve full effectiveness.
We also appreciate the important work done by
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, and the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng. Luxembourg
encourages the Secretary-General to appoint a successor
to Mr. Šimonović as soon as possible.
We thank Ghana and Australia for their initiative
in putting the responsibility to protect on the agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session.
Luxembourg supports the permanent inclusion of this
item on the Assembly’s agenda, as well as the adoption
of a draft resolution affirming our responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Current events make it clear that whatever
normative progress has been made in recent years is
inadequate to the realities on the ground. The worrisome
developments we have seen in the past few weeks are a
reminder of the fact that respect for the rule of law is a
key principle in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Since the adoption of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, civilian deaths in conflict have
increased tenfold. Last week, on World Refugee Day,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Filippo Grandi, called attention to the fact that more
than 68 million people are currently forcibly displaced.
The list of conflicts in which we have seen large-scale
atrocities — sometimes in front of our very eyes and in
real time — is too long to cite them all today.
In the face of the resultant human suffering,
diplomatic impasses are multiplying. We know that this
situation is not inevitable and therefore fully support
the code of conduct developed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group to promote action
by the Security Council against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We also support the
2/29

02/07/2018

initiative of France and Mexico aimed at avoiding the
use of the veto in situations where there is a risk that
mass atrocities may be committed against the civilian
population. We believe that the responsibility to
protect does not contradict State sovereignty but rather
consolidates and legitimizes it.
Luxembourg deems the protection and promotion
of human rights to be fundamental to preventing
atrocities. The Universal Periodic Reviews carried out
within the framework of the Human Rights Council and
its special procedures mandate holders play a leading
role in United Nations early-warning systems and
recommendations for early action.
Luxembourg encourages all Member States to
cooperate fully with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and with all
special procedures mandate holders. Luxembourg
encourages the United Nations entities working in
the field to continue with their horizontal “human
rights first” approach.
We consider the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity
Crimes developed by the Office of the Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect an effective tool, for
the United Nations as well as for regional organizations
and civil society.
Finally, we believe that the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect — in which Luxembourg
participates in both New York and Geneva — and the
Global Network of R2P Focal Points, in which we
also participate, strengthen existing measures. We
encourage all States that have yet to designate a focal
point for the responsibility to protect to do so.
This year we commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Luxembourg
believes that the responsibility to protect and the
fight against impunity are inseparable. We therefore
encourage all States to ratify or accede to this
indispensable instrument of international law.
Twenty years after its adoption, we also call for the
universalization of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Luxembourg remains committed to an
effective multilateral system and an international order
founded on the rule of law. Our efforts to safeguard
human dignity must never give in to intimidation, and
insularity must never become the norm. That is why,
18-20585

02/07/2018

13 years after the 2005 World Summit, we reaffirm our
full commitment to the responsibility to protect.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): The debate on the
responsibility to protect, as a formal agenda item of the
seventy-second session, is an important opportunity to
address the issues of the prevention of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity through open and
unhindered dialogue.
We express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for sharing his vision for collective action
and welcome the focus of his most recent report on the
issue, entitled “Responsibility to protect: from early
warning to early action” (A/72/884).
We want to emphasize the importance of a forthright
and candid process of reflection on the concept of the
responsibility to protect, so as to ensure that the varying
interpretations of and scepticism towards certain
aspects of the concept do not undermine the joint
efforts to protect populations at risk. The membership’s
constructive engagement in addressing concerns and
disagreements is very important.
The Secretary-General’s report once again
emphasizes that the responsibility to protect challenges
us to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past, when
too little was done to prevent genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity or to
protect vulnerable populations. We reiterate our full
support and appreciation to the Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, as well
as the Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, and the former Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, for
their work and dedication.
Armenia recognizes the crucial role of Special
Advisers in monitoring and reporting on situations
involving atrocity crimes. In this context, we would
like to emphasize the importance of detecting and
addressing any manifestations of hate speech, racism
and xenophobia, as well as unhindered warmongering
propaganda, in assessing specific country situations.

A/72/PV.105

protection of the rights of ethnic, national and religious
groups and to denounce identity-based violence and
atrocities. To that end, Armenia, together with other
countries, has organized a number of events in recent
years, including in the framework of the Human
Rights Council and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In November, Yerevan
hosted the OSCE conference entitled “Countering and
preventing hate crimes against Christians and members
of other religious groups”.
The report’s recommendations concerning existing
human rights mechanisms, such as the special procedures
of the Human Rights Council, the treaty bodies and the
Universal Periodic Review process, deserve careful
attention and application, as they are well positioned
to play a crucial role and have a positive impact on
early prevention. Armenia has always promoted the
notion of early response, precisely in the context of
prevention, and our track record is well known. The
resolutions adopted in the Human Rights Council serve
as a basis for formulating preventive strategies against
the crime of genocide. In March, the Human Rights
Council adopted by consensus a resolution initiated by
Armenia on genocide prevention, which urges all States
to implement accepted Universal Periodic Review
recommendations related to the prevention of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. In order to
operationalize atrocity prevention, it is essential that
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
provide States with guidance, assistance and follow-up,
as reflected in the resolution.
The proclamation of 9 December as the International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of
the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this
Crime is a manifestation of an important consensus
within the international community on preventing the
recurrence of atrocity crimes.

Armenia has consistently highlighted the
importance of prioritizing early prevention, which
includes sufficient capacity to identify early-warning
signs in situations that may deteriorate and lead to the
perpetration of mass crimes if not addressed.

Since 2015, Armenia has regularly hosted the
Global Forum against the Crime of Genocide, attended
by public, religious, academic, civil-society and media
representatives from across the world. Later this year,
the Global Forum will focus on the role that education
and media can play in preventing identity-based
crimes and countering denialism. We encourage all
Member States and all relevant United Nations entities
to contribute.

In international forums, it has been Armenia’s
long-standing policy to strongly advocate for the

The year 2018 marks the seventieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of

18-205853/29

A/72/PV.105

the Crime of Genocide, which is yet another milestone
in reaffirming our collective determination to fight
impunity for the crime of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. On the occasion of this
anniversary, Armenia has proposed and supported the
launch of a purposeful United Nations-wide campaign
to raise awareness of the Convention and promote its
universalization. As a country that has consistently
advanced the issue of genocide prevention, including
within the United Nations, Armenia will continue to
make determined efforts to promote consolidated
international action aimed at the prevention of and
accountability for atrocity crimes.
Mr. Musikhin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): From the very beginning, our delegation has
opposed the inclusion of the concept of the responsibility
to protect as an item on the General Assembly’s agenda
at this session, a decision that we believe is mistaken.
I would like to briefly recall the history surrounding
the issue.
The only recognized source for the concept of the
responsibility to protect is the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document. However, since then — that is, 13
years ago — States have not been able to agree on a
uniform interpretation of its provisions. Moreover, the
concept, on which there has always been a wide range
of opinions, has been consistently degraded. Against
that backdrop, in autumn 2017 a group of States,
instead of continuing our interactive dialogue, forced a
vote in the General Committee and then in the General
Assembly in order to bring about the convening of
today’s meeting. Such methods have only led to further
confrontation, as the current discussion has confirmed.
As a result, the initiators of the vote are destroying the
fragile consensus of 2005 with their own hands. At this
point, we have to conclude that it no longer exists. It is
worth noting that previously, while the responsibility to
protect was never a norm or rule, there was at least an
understanding of its conceptual foundations. Now there
is not even that.
The reports of the Secretariat, including document
A/72/884, claim some progress in the implementation
of the concept. It is difficult for us to understand what
that consists of, as there is no evidence for it in the
report itself. Some routine repetitive attempts have been
made year after year to formalize it, including through
the creation of national focal points, but it is still not
clear what their practical contribution is. In theory, the
reports should establish the current state of affairs in
4/29

02/07/2018

the discussion of the concept, indicate all the existing
points of view and, importantly, the controversial
aspects that States should come to an agreement
on. There has been nothing about any of this in the
reports. Incidentally, paragraph 8 of the current report
states explicitly that the Special Adviser consulted
widely with Member States during its preparation.
However, during the round tables that were held for
that purpose, there was harsh criticism of the concept
and its implementation in practice. Why are we not
seeing those positions in the report? A large number of
delegations have spoken about the serious flaws in the
concept during the interactive dialogues and in other
formats for many years, and yet the complete lack of
analysis of those problems in the Secretariat documents
continues. There is no point in hoping that formalizing
the discussion in the General Assembly will somehow
change these approaches to the issue.
If I may, I would now like to turn to the essence
of the contradictions around the concept, which has
now lost any basis for consensus on it. In its original
form, it was conceived as an instrument capable of
making a significant contribution to strengthening
international peace and security. The idea carried a
powerful, positive humanistic potential. However, its
application in practice has turned out to be a disaster,
and the people it was supposed to protect have suffered
even more as a result. Now the responsibility to protect
is associated with a particular sequence of events,
consisting of illegal interference from outside by
force, so-called regime change, the destruction of State
systems, governmental paralysis and economic ruin.
We should point out that many have previously
posited the Libya story as the first case of the practical
application of the concept. What was the result?
The NATO coalition’s military actions regarding
Libya, carried out under the pretext of protecting the
population, plunged the country into a lengthy period
of chaos and instability. The loss of human life, the
destruction of public administration and infrastructure,
the emergence of Da’esh in Libya and the massive
migration crisis in the Mediterranean have continued
to this day. The absence of any announced result
in this case is not surprising. In reality, the military
operation in Libya had only one goal, which was
removing the country’s then leader from the political
arena. Once Muammar Al-Qadhafi had been killed and
his Government removed from power, the protection of
18-20585

02/07/2018

civilians was quickly forgotten. That is what we now
associate with the responsibility to protect.
A more recent example occurred on 14 April, when
three permanent members of the Security Council,
committed to firmly upholding the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of force,
committed an act of aggression against a sovereign
State, in this case Syria. After the events of that day, the
best that the Government of Great Britain could come
up with was a reference to the philosophy of so-called
humanitarian intervention, which the international
community has repudiated. Let us remember that it
was the forerunner of this concept of the responsibility
to protect that was the basis for the slogans under
which NATO troops dropped bombs on civilians in
Yugoslavia. No one has been held responsible for
the barbaric interference in the affairs of the former
Yugoslavia, Libya or Syria, or for its consequences. We
often hear about the importance of combating impunity
in this Hall. At long last, is it not time to deal with
these champions of humanitarian intervention and their
contemporary equivalents in their gross violations of
international law?
In conclusion, we would like to once again affirm
our position that any formalization of discussions on
the responsibility to protect is pointless and in many
cases completely useless. We have so far seen no
disposition among the concept’s ideologues to analyse
its inherent contradictions or recognize the blatant
abuses committed and disastrous mistakes that have
been made in the attempts to implement it. Instead,
we are invited to discuss non-essential elements and
details. We are therefore against the inclusion of this
issue as a standing item on the agenda of the General
Assembly. The current debate in the Assembly has
nonetheless been of some use. It has once again shown
that if nothing is done about these mistakes, the concept
will surely suffer the same fate as its predecessor,
humanitarian intervention, and will eventually fade
into oblivion.
Mrs. Elmarmuri (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for his initiative to hold this meeting
on the responsibility to protect. This annual debate
will enhance the mandate of the General Assembly to
continue considering this item and will give us a chance
to benefit from different viewpoints and measures
adopted regarding early warning in order to limit the
impact of crises.

A/72/PV.105

The 2005 World Summit Outcome document,
which was adopted by Heads of State and Government
on the responsibility to protect citizens from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, was based on a number of pillars, including
the responsibility of States to protect their citizens and
the responsibility of the international community to
help States and to protect their citizens when States
clearly fail to do so. However, the adoption of this
principle has fallen far short of achieving the intended
objective, given the disturbing developments that we
have seen in the past few years, which threaten to widen
the gap between the commitment of Heads of State
and Government and the realities on the ground that
people throughout the world face as a result of internal
conflicts and the funding that fuels them.
Against that backdrop, my delegation would like to
highlight several important points that are at the core of
our discussion today.
First, there is a need to enhance early-warning
mechanisms that could help Governments to identify
resentments at their early stages. before they are
exacerbated, and to hold the parties to a conflict legally
accountable and responsible for the damage they
have caused.
Secondly, it will not be possible to achieve
successful, peaceful solutions, end crises due to armed
conflict or eliminate the threat of terrorism and its
repercussions until the obstacles to such peaceful
solutions are addressed. They include interference
in the internal affairs of States, wars, divisions and
sedition, along with assisting and funding terrorist
groups. Strict sanctions should be imposed while at
the same time strengthening the role of the Security
Council and accountability mechanisms.
Thirdly, monitoring systems should be enhanced
while preventing the emergence of divisions based on
religion, race or doctrine, which can lead to growing
hostility among a country’s citizens. Extremist
ideologies should be addressed by establishing
cooperation and dialogue between religions and
cultures and identifying common human values.
In conclusion, my country underscores its renewed
commitment to a responsibility to protect that must
be supported by action. Early-warning mechanisms
should be based on integrity and reflect a spirit of
professionalism, without any political interference or
double standards.

18-205855/29

A/72/PV.105

Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank and commend the President of the General
Assembly for holding this plenary meeting on an issue
of great importance that requires serious and thorough
analysis by the General Assembly. We would also
like to convey our gratitude, through the President,
to the Secretary-General for his tenth report on the
responsibility to protect (A/72/884), which focuses on
early warning and the early adoption of measures. I
also thank the delegations of Australia and Ghana for
their facilitation efforts.
The State of Ecuador believes that the responsibility
to protect is an issue that cannot be taken lightly.
Although the concept has a humanitarian basis, it is
also true that it must be implemented based on premises
that do not undermine the guarantees provided to and
the sovereignty of States.
In 2005, we supported the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 60/1, which endorsed by consensus
the 2005 World Summit Outcome document, which
clearly established the three pillars that should underpin
the idea of the
​​ responsibility to protect. The first is
identifying the State as the entity with the primary
role of protecting its population from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The second emphasizes the role to be played by the
international community through cooperation and the
provision of assistance, in order to enable States to
build local capacity that will enable them to meet their
responsibilities. The third is to enable the international
community to take collective measures, in accordance
with the norms and procedures established in the
Charter of the United Nations, that is, through the
Security Council, in accordance with Chapters VI and
VII of the Charter.
The Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador sets
out, as a fundamental principle of coexistence, the
need to guarantee full respect for human rights and
the obligation of States to fight for their realization.
We therefore believe that the three pillars should be
implemented in strict accord with national policy and in
chronological sequence, with priority always accorded
to the first two, on the understanding that the third, and
any eventual use of force, should come into play only in
exceptional circumstances and as a last resort, and only
by resolution of the Security Council, in accordance
with Chapters VI and VII of the Charter and other
established norms and principles.
6/29

02/07/2018

We reiterate that only the General Assembly has the
legal capacity and authority to define the responsibility
to protect and, more specifically, to identify the
conceptual, institutional and political dimensions of the
task of its implementation. Although the responsibility
to protect is a concept that requires further analysis
and discussion among the States Members of the
Organization, we trust that this new format for debate
will give us the opportunity to discuss it with greater
interest and political commitment, in a transparent and
constructive manner, and to seek to protect civilians
wherever atrocity crimes are committed, impartially
and without selectivity.
There is a clear recognition of the fact that the
upsurge of conflicts in the world is linked to situations
of discrimination, marginalization, exclusion and the
illegal occupation of foreign territory. Such conflicts
cannot be resolved through the simple use of force.
For this reason, Ecuador emphasizes that conflict
prevention through the peaceful settlement of disputes
is the best way to prevent the commission of atrocity
crimes. The best way to prevent conflict and the most
expeditious way to strengthen national capacities
lies in building confidence in the law and in public
international law, and we must ensure respect for the
institutions established to that end and accountability
for them.
With regard to accountability, we want to highlight
the role played by the International Criminal Court in
the maintenance of international peace and justice, in
safeguarding the rule of law and as an essential element
in conflict prevention and the provision of reparations
to the victims of the most serious crimes. We therefore
reiterate our support for the Court as a mechanism that
is uniquely designed to tackle impunity. We call on all
States to accede to the Rome Statute so as to ensure
its universality.
Finally, we reiterate our confidence in the role played
by regional and subregional organizations in preventing
conflicts and the commission of the aforementioned
crimes. Often early-warning mechanisms can avert a
crisis of greater proportions or prevent a situation in a
country from deteriorating and leading to an outbreak
of violence against the civilian population, which
generally affects the most vulnerable of its members.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): I would first like to
express our appreciation for the report of the Secretary18-20585

02/07/2018

A/72/PV.105

General dated 1 June 2018 entitled “Responsibility to
protect: from early warning to early action” (A/72/884).

a demonstration of transparency and inclusiveness and
a reference to the principle of non-intervention.

Our Constitution mandates that the Government and
the people promote and protect — as a priority — human
rights for everyone. At the same time, the principle of
upholding humanity remains one of Indonesia’s longstanding norms and values. A society’s ability to protect
its most vulnerable members is therefore important. To
that end, the responsibility to protect should always be
our fundamental credo, on the basis of the unassailable
premise that innocent civilians are entitled to protection
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

In 2012, ASEAN adopted its own Human Rights
Declaration, which details member States’ commitment
to upholding human rights for its 600 million people
and beyond. It has also established the ASEAN Institute
for Peace and Reconciliation, which is dedicated to
research activities and to providing recommendations
to member States on peace, conflict management and
conflict resolution.

Today, 13 years after the adoption of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document, there is still an ongoing
debate on the concept and implementation of the right
to protect. In our view, this is positive progress. An
important yet delicate issue such as the responsibility
to protect deserves attention and an in-depth dialogue
until a balance is reached between maintaining
international peace and security and upholding the
sovereignty of the State.
Indonesia believes that the responsibility to protect
should be viewed in a broader context. It must also
focus on prevention. In that regard, Indonesia supports
the report of the Secretary-General, which mentions
early-warning systems in particular. In our view, while
human and institutional capacity are obviously of great
importance, capacity-building is also essential in areas
such as the strengthening of legal frameworks and earlywarning mechanisms. If the responsibility to protect
is to be successfully and effectively implemented,
systematic measures must be put in place to promote
its principles.
Indonesia would also like to once again emphasize
the importance of strengthening institutional
frameworks and building the resilience of communities
throughout the world. We must work ceaselessly to
promote respect and tolerance among all peoples at
various levels.
We reiterate our belief that regional organizations
can and must play a more active role in implementing
the responsibility to protect, as we are doing with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
The establishment of the ASEAN Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights will serve as a useful
model for regional prevention measures. The fact that all
members of ASEAN are members of the Commission is

Finally, I wish to take this opportunity once again
to call on the Security Council to recognize its critical
role in the prevention of genocide, ethnic cleansing,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We reiterate
that the permanent members of the Security Council
must refrain from the use of the veto in the face of the
potential occurrence of such crimes, including in the
context of the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population by the international community, as supported
by a large majority of the United Nations membership.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran fully shares the sentiment
that the international community must be vigilant if
it is to prevent the horrors of past mass killings and
genocide from being repeated in future. No one can
forget how inaction on the part of the United Nations in
the face of tragic cases of genocide and crimes against
humanity, as well as outrageous acts of aggression, has
over the past two decades resulted in death, injury or
displacement for millions of innocent people. However,
this has been more a failure on the part of the Security
Council to act when action was needed rather than the
result of the absence of a normative framework or of
the non-implementation of the responsibility to protect.
Thus it was inaction on the part of the Security
Council, as a result of a lack of political will on the
part of some of its permanent members, that brought
about the tragic genocide in Rwanda and other
similar catastrophes. The controversies centred on the
responsibility to protect are not rooted in the noble
notion of the prevention of atrocity crimes but rather
in its implementation and the scope of its application.
Examining this concept in practical terms can help
us to view it from a better perspective and make this
abstract concept more concrete. Moreover, the discussion
of the responsibility to protect cannot be divorced from
the concept’s political and legal implications. Looking
forward should not relieve us of the responsibility

18-205857/29

A/72/PV.105

to look back and remind ourselves of the lessons of
history. We have seen in practice that the responsibility
to protect has been guided by the politicized interests of
certain States rather than by notions of human dignity
and human rights, and it has therefore diverged greatly
from its alleged objectives and purposes. That in turn
has called into question its legitimacy and applicability
as a political tool to be used in times of distress. As a
result, the responsibility to protect is gradually being
developed and seen as a political tool for paving the way
for the selective application of interventionist policies
whenever needed. This is exactly where the concept of
the responsibility to protect faces a real challenge.
The normative framework regulating the
prevention of atrocities is already in place. Compliance
with the fundamental principles of international law,
as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
contributes to the rule of law at the international
level and builds on the existing bulwark that forms
the very basis of the international legal order. The
main problem lies in illegitimate unilateral action by
certain States, which every now and then creates chaos
in international relations and undermines the existing
normative structure.
The illegal use of force blatantly demonstrated in
sudden, unjustified strikes, in flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States Members
of the United Nations, is a clear example of abuse of the
well-established rules and principles of international
law governing self-defence and the use of force. It
makes it clear that the responsibility to protect has a
dark future if it is designed to be used as a political tool
for furthering the will of a few.
The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that we are
still far from having a consensus on our understanding
of the responsibility to protect as a concept. We believe
that before implementing the responsibility to protect,
it is crucial to define its normative framework and
scope of application. The primary responsibility for
preventing the commission of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity lies with
sovereign States. This is a core principle of international
law, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and articulated in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
Summit Outcome document.
Other States, or the international community at
large, may step in to prevent such heinous atrocities
upon request, on a case-by-case basis and through the
8/29

02/07/2018

United Nations. That by no means implies permission
to use force against another State on any pretext, such
as humanitarian intervention, which could pave the way
for all kinds of politically motivated interventions in
other countries. I am sure that no one would like to turn
back the clock to a time when the theory of so-called
just wars prevailed.
The prevention of mass atrocity crimes should
remain the core objective of the responsibility to
protect. It should be seen as a long-term strategy, and
it should be interpreted in broad terms and include
mainly non-coercive measures. Even the third pillar
of the responsibility to protect encompasses several
measures that do not necessarily call for coercion. In
that context, the responsibility to protect should be seen
as a framework for helping vulnerable or failed States
to develop their capacity to protect their population and
build safer societies. Prevention involves a broad range
of issues ranging from the promotion of sustainable
development, education and health care to the eradication
of poverty, marginalization and discrimination.
The international community should discharge
its responsibility in that respect, particularly through
the provision of demand-driven capacity-building
aimed at strengthening the resilience of societies and
addressing the root causes of conflict. The objective
of the responsibility to protect should not be regime
change but rather the protection of the population,
mainly through the empowerment of societies and a
reduction in inequality. In the limited cases where
coercive measures are needed to save the population,
the responsibility to protect falls within the collective
security framework of the United Nations and can
be authorized only by the Security Council in full
compliance with international law. Authorization by
the Security Council should not be understood as carte
blanche for the commission of fresh atrocities. It also
goes without saying that the Security Council is not
free to selectively opt for the authorization of the use
of force in cases consistent with the will of its member
States or to turn a blind eye to clear situations of mass
atrocities, as we have witnessed in the past and are
still witnessing now.
The Security Council is therefore bound by
well-established principles of international law and
should respect the sovereignty of States and their
independence, and action to prevent mass crimes and
atrocities should be seen as a last resort undertaken
only after all efforts to take effective measures at the
18-20585

02/07/2018

A/72/PV.105

national level have been exhausted. The scope of the
application of the responsibility to protect should be
defined in a way that genuinely addresses the plight
of humankind whenever it faces mass atrocity crimes,
free from selectivity and double standards and in full
conformity with the principles and objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations. Addressing the misery
of people under occupation is the most important test of
the responsibility to protect.

a tool for legitimizing their interference, aggression
and regime-change ambitions in other Member States,
while now urging for rapid implementation of the
responsibility to protect, on which there is no consensus.

In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran insists
on the primacy of the well-established principles of
international law, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, in all circumstances. We hope that
further discussions on the issue will be held in the
context of efforts to prevent any future abuses of newly
emerging concepts, as we have witnessed in the past
with regard to some of the provisions of the Charter.

The Government of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will continue to place the interests
of its people at the top of its list of priorities and to
protect and promote their human rights. We take this
opportunity to stress once again that the risk-laden
concept of the responsibility to protect, which has not
been agreed on by all Member States and has been
misused for illegal collective armed intervention based
on political motives, selectivity and double standards,
should no longer be considered as an item on the formal
agenda of the General Assembly.

Mr. Ja Song Nam (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): I would like to state the position of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at this plenary
meeting on the report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/884) on the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity.
First, we do not support discussions on the
responsibility to protect in the General Assembly as a
formal agenda item because there is no consensus on
it among all States Members of the United Nations. At
the plenary meeting on 15 September (see A/72/PV.2),
the recommendation to include discussion of the
responsibility to protect in the formal agenda of the
General Assembly was approved by a vote, which
makes it clear that the views of Member States on it
continue to differ. We consider it a priority to narrow
gaps through informal debates, as we have not reached
a consensus on the core issues related to the concept of
the responsibility to protect.
Secondly, the responsibility to protect peoples
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity is entirely the sovereign
right of a State. It must not be applied in a manner that
interferes in States’ internal affairs. As we have seen in
the Middle East and Africa, some States have created
chaos in developing countries, conducted collective
military invasions on the pretext of protecting civilians
and overthrown legitimate Governments, killing many
civilians and causing the displacement of millions as
refugees. They abuse the responsibility to protect as

Thirdly, root causes such as hunger, poverty,
inequality, discrimination and interference in others’
internal affairs must first be addressed to protect
people from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.

Mr. Suan (Myanmar): My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive 2018
report (A/72/884), entitled “Responsibility to protect:
from early warning to early action”, concentrating on
how to better prevent atrocity crimes.
Thirteen years have passed since the adoption
of the 2005 World Summit Outcome document on
the concept of the responsibility to protect. Despite
intensive interactive debates among Member States on
the issue for more than a decade, we have not been able
to reach a consensus on how to translate the concept
into practice. While recognizing the importance of the
prevention of atrocity crimes, I would like to emphasize
once again that it is the primary responsibility of
States to protect their citizens. The international
community can provide assistance to Governments in
their national efforts to undertake their responsibilities
through capacity-building. Preventive measures should
employ the peaceful means of dialogue, negotiations,
confidence-building and reconciliation. Interfaith
dialogues and the promotion of religious harmony
among different faiths can also contribute significantly
to peace and stability among different communities and
effectively prevent tension and violent confrontation.
In that respect, countries should develop the
policies and mechanisms best suited to their own
situations in order to prevent conflict and ensure the
peaceful settlement of disputes. National ownership

18-205859/29

A/72/PV.105

must be ensured for preventing crimes related to the
responsibility to protect. With regard to international
involvement in the responsibility to protect, respect
for the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, as well as the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, must be strictly upheld. My delegation
would like to stress that judging or categorizing a
situation as a specific mass atrocity, or deciding to
invoke the responsibility to protect, must be done based
on well-founded, unbiased and factual information,
with impartiality, accuracy and objectivity. In that
connection, we are concerned about the existential
danger presented by the misuse or abuse of the principles
of the responsibility to protect by some groups and
countries for their political agenda. My delegation
categorically rejects the unsubstantiated accusations
about the recent humanitarian situation in Rakhine
state and its labelling as amounting to atrocity crimes.
With regard to accountability, my delegation
concurs that States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute crimes committed within their
jurisdiction. As a State party to the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
the Government of Myanmar has a clear position,
which is that it will not condone any abuse of human
rights. When concrete evidence exists, we are ready to
take action against the transgressors, regardless of their
identity, in accordance with the law. In that regard, the
Government recently announced its decision to form
an independent commission of inquiry, together with
an international member, to investigate human rights
violations following the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army’s terrorist attacks on 30 security outposts in
Rakhine state in August 2017.
We are also concerned about the politicization
and abuse of the International Criminal Court beyond
its jurisdiction. Such actions can only jeopardize the
legitimacy and integrity of the Court.
My delegation strongly objects to the inclusion of
my country, Myanmar, under the subheading entitled
“Forced displacement and refugee crisis” in the points
for consideration at this meeting, as a country in which
atrocity crimes have allegedly taken place. Such a
prejudicial judgment, based on unfounded allegations
and continuing media bias, will not contribute to the
objective and constructive elaboration of the matter
under discussion.
10/29

02/07/2018

Since there remains a wide range of differences on
the understanding and interpretation of this complex
concept, we should continue the present method of
interactive dialogue with a view to achieving consensus
on the part of all Member States on translating the
concept of the responsibility to protect into action in
accordance with the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document and resolution 63/308. We should point out
that a vote was needed to adopt a recommendation to
include this item in the formal agenda of the General
Assembly (see A/72/PV.2), which showed a clear lack
of consensus. We have been witnesses to the fact that
the manipulation of the concept of the responsibility
to protect, along with hypocrisy and the application of
double standards, has led to catastrophic consequences.
We should first focus on strengthening States’ capacity
and institutions for protecting their populations from
atrocity crimes and on constructive engagement with
those States, including by using diplomatic approaches
and providing practical support.
In conclusion, my delegation therefore does not
support the inclusion of the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity as a standing
item on the General Assembly agenda or in the further
pursuit of a resolution in that regard.
Ms. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda): It is fitting that we
are gathered in this Hall to discuss the responsibility
to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, a
timely topic amid a number of worrisome global
trends. Rwanda welcomes today’s formal debate in
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on
the responsibility to protect, and congratulates Ghana
and Australia on their joint efforts to make the item
part of the formal agenda. Rwanda would like to also
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/72/884),
entitled “Responsibility to protect: from early warning
to early action”.
My country aligns itself with the statement delivered
previously by the Permanent Representative of Qatar
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect (see A/72/PV.99).
Sovereignty as responsibility is the philosophical
bedrock of the doctrine of the responsibility to
protect. It is crucial to ensure that this ideology,
based on the understanding that with sovereignty
comes responsibility, remains in view whenever we
18-20585

02/07/2018

discuss the responsibility to protect. Undeniably, in the
experience of Rwanda, we now understand, looking
back, that when a State is responsible for egregious
violations of human rights, that should not prevent
other actors from intervening. This is the essence of the
pillars of the responsibility to protect. It is significant
that we are having this meeting during a year in which
we are celebrating the seventieth anniversaries of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide. It is important that Member States
that have yet to become party to the Convention do so
as an essential step towards accepting the notion that
with sovereignty comes responsibility.
Rwanda believes that as the Secretary-General
mentioned in his report, early warning and early action
should be an integral part of national, regional and
international mechanisms to avoid atrocity crimes.
This is crucial to enabling States and other relevant
actors to respond rapidly and seek solutions before
situations escalate. In that regard, the Human Rights
Council’s Universal Periodic Review is an important,
well-placed tool for Member States to support atrocitycrimes prevention efforts. Rwanda has accepted and
will endeavour to fully implement 50 Universal Periodic
Review recommendations agreed on in 2015 before the
next review cycle.
In our subregion, the East African Community has
established the Eastern Africa Standby Force, which is
mandated to enhance peace and security in the region.
It is one of five regional multidimensional forces of the
African Standby Force, consisting of military, police
and civilian components. The African Standby Force
is in the process of implementing its early-warning
system, which will be part of the mechanisms to provide
capability for rapid preventive deployment, peace
support and enforcement operations. Furthermore, the
African Union has taken positive steps to establish the
Continental Early Warning System, which will play
a key role in the African Union Peace and Security
Council’s mission to prevent, manage and resolve
conflicts by anticipating and reporting on situations
across the continent. These are encouraging steps
for ensuring that national Governments and regional
and international organizations are well equipped to
respond to any occurrences of atrocities in good time.
I want to conclude by highlighting three areas
that Rwanda believes should be part of the continuous
discussion of the responsibility to protect. The first

A/72/PV.105

is accountability. Holding those involved in atrocity
crimes accountable is fundamental to standing up
against impunity and preventing the recurrence of
such crimes. While national systems have the primary
responsibility for ensuring accountability, when they
are not able to do so, the international system must act
credibly by ensuring that Member States interact on an
equal footing.
My second point concerns peacekeeping. As
a troop- and police-contributing country, Rwanda
believes that peacekeepers can be a catalyst for stability
in countries where they are deployed, helping to create
an atmosphere conducive to strengthening peace. The
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians enhance
peacekeeping missions by placing the protection of
civilians at the heart of peacekeeping missions. We
encourage more members to endorse these principles.
My third and final point concerns women, peace
and security. Sexual and gender-based violence is a
constant in conflicts around the world. We believe that
aligning the peace and security pillars more closely
with the development and humanitarian pillars to create
greater coordination and coherence, while ensuring
an inclusive approach with women’s participation at
all levels, will enable a more robust response in the
protection of those at risk of widespread sexual violence.
Mr. Arrocha Ruíz (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation
for the significant progress that this formal debate
represents as the first on the responsibility to protect
after almost a decade. We are also grateful to the
representatives of Australia and Ghana for their
leadership in this process.
Panama aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/72/
PV.99), and consequently reaffirms its commitment
to the three pillars of the responsibility to protect and
our collective responsibility to protect our people from
the scourge of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, as established at the 2005
World Summit.
We welcome the formal inclusion of this item on
the agenda of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly and the focus on prevention proposed by
the Secretary-General in his report of 1 June 2018
(A/72/884), with regard to the priority role of early
warning and subsequent timely action that States are

18-2058511/29

A/72/PV.105

called upon to ensure. The report’s recommendations are
very important to fulfilling the primary responsibility
to protect.
The current debate on the need to preserve and
strengthen multilateralism as the most effective way to
address global challenges in the areas of human rights,
development, migration and refugee crises, among
others, is becoming increasingly important and requires
collective efforts to create an atmosphere of trust, in
the interests of the most vulnerable populations. The
leadership that the international community, primarily
the United Nations, and in particular the Security
Council, is called on to show in addressing the growing
threats to international peace and security in a timely
manner and in accordance with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations is essential to building
credibility and trust among people.
There is no doubt that the decisions taken by
the Security Council are crucial to the agenda of
the prevention of atrocity crimes. Given its primary
responsibility for ensuring international peace and
security, timely action in the decision-making of the
Security Council, chiefly on the part of the permanent
members, is critical to preventing acts of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
In that regard and bearing in mind that human
rights can lead nations on a path to peace and security,
in 2015 Panama joined the French-Mexican initiative in
support of suspending the use of the veto in the Security
Council in cases of mass atrocities, as well as the code
of conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, because we share the belief
that situations of mass atrocities are unacceptable from
any point of view, and contrary to the spirit that gave
rise to our Organization. Similarly, in searching for the
best way to address the issue, we stress the importance
of the words of the Secretary-General’s report on the
need for the United Nations to reflect on cases where
it has failed and to examine its success stories, so that
they can also be considered in the detection of cases
of risk, and so that the principle of early warning can
become the Organization’s principal raison d’être.
With regard to national efforts, States must commit
to using the broadest possible range of international
instruments for prohibiting and preventing atrocity
crimes and protecting their peoples. As a country
whose international policy rests on the protection of
fundamental rights, Panama has therefore formalized
12/29

02/07/2018

its deposit of its instrument of ratification of the
Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute, and has
thereby strengthened its national legal framework and
its commitment to the international community, of
which accountability is a crucial element.
While we reiterate that the primary responsibility
to protect lies with States, the constructive participation
of other actors in promoting action by civil society and
thereby building cohesive and inclusive societies, is an
added value in the focus on prevention. Accordingly,
and in support of national capacities, the active role
of civil society and the empowerment of women, girls
and young people as agents of change are becoming
increasingly important in promoting and strengthening
peaceful societies and preventing and settling conflicts.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Panama’s
commitment to the protection of all human rights
and the elimination of all forms of discrimination.
There is a pressing need for a paradigm shift in which
accountability, capacity-building and political will
prevail, together with ethical values, to ensure that our
actions are not only just but are also effectively aimed
at protecting populations at risk.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish):
We have the honour of participating in this first meeting
of the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity following the
agreement reached at the seventy-first session, and
thanks to the work of Australia and Ghana.
During the 2009 session, Andorra also expressed
its support at the outset (see A/63/PV.99), considering
the importance of implementing the concept, which is
a responsibility that each State has to all of its citizens,
in accordance with paragraphs 138 and 139 of the
2005 World Summit. Multilateralism can contribute
effectively to the success of this approach.
In this year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/884), entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
early warning to early action”, we are urged to combine
action with words in a strategy that should involve both
State institutions and civil society and create a culture
of prevention. In this regard, I would like to recall that
the President of the General Assembly warned us in
his opening remarks that prevention does not make
headlines in the press (see A/72/PV.99). In addition to
the crucial role of the media, ongoing in-depth efforts
are needed to create and strengthen prevention.
18-20585

02/07/2018

I would like to underscore three aspects of this issue
as useful principles for the responsibility to protect.
First, human rights, as early-warning indicators of
potential conflicts and their consequences on the ground,
together with the work of the Human Rights Council and
the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review
in its specific analyses and recommendations, are all
tools for identifying high-risk situations and taking
action. This meeting could not be more timely since,
as has already been mentioned, the year 2018 marks the
seventieth anniversaries of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, which are
key to the issue we are discussing today.
Secondly, and as we have reiterated on other
occasions, international justice ensures a sense of
collective responsibility. We encourage States that
have not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute,
whose twentieth anniversary we will celebrate next
month, as we fight against impunity for crimes against
humanity and in the interest of the universality of
the Statute and the International Criminal Court. We
would also urge States to sign the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, which calls
for preventive action.
Thirdly, as the reports of the Secretary-General
also highilght, education is needed to strengthen the
values of knowledge and respect for cultural diversity
and peaceful coexistence, which are inclusive values
that underpin non-discrimination in all its forms.
Through them, prevention, which is central to the work
of the United Nations in bringing about a world of
peace, can become effective. In armed conflicts, our
objective is to give maximum support to the protection
of children, and we consider it absolutely essential to
respect educational and health infrastructure and the
personnel who work in these areas.
Education for global and democratic citizenship can
be instrumental in preventing conflicts and building
resilience. Providing quality education, with values,
is also a responsibility of States in their commitment
to major transformations under the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): Bangladesh considers
this formal debate in the General Assembly on the
responsibility to protect an important development. We
are encouraged to see the list of speakers and level of

A/72/PV.105

participation at this debate and hope that its continued
momentum will help to clarify and demystify certain
issues concerning the responsibility to protect. We see
merit in having this as a standing item on the agenda of
the General Assembly.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (see
A/72/PV.99). We thank the President of the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General for their hardhitting and forward-looking statements.
Bangladesh reaffirms its commitment to the
responsibility to protect as expressed and adopted
in the 2005 World Summit. We consider the three
pillars of the responsibility to protect to constitute
its core foundation and remain sensitized to concerns
among a number of Member States about the possible
ramifications of the third pillar in particular. We do not
consider that principled opposition to the third pillar
can take us forward in any way unless we make an effort
to reconcile it as part of the responsibility-to-protect
architecture with the necessary understandings and
safeguards built around it. We would urge all Member
States to approach the issue in that constructive spirit.
We underscore that States have the primary
responsibility to protect and that it should not be
asserted to contravene the fundamental principle of
State sovereignty. The prerogative of States to maintain
and enforce law and order and protect their citizens
must be founded on a nationally determined legal
basis, in adherence to relevant international norms and
standards. However, in cases where a State appears
unable or unwilling to assume the responsibility to
protect, the international community cannot simply
ignore the situation and relegate it to the domain of
internal or bilateral affairs. The United Nations in
particular has a role to play in this context, in the light
of the purposes and principles of its Charter.
We therefore endorse the Secretary-General’s vision
of making the prevention of atrocities the centrepiece of
his prevention agenda. The various forms of atrocities,
such as genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing, that we continue to witness
around the world reinforce the urgency of the task at
hand. There is a near-convergence of views that the
United Nations has the scope to further step up its
efforts in preventing and responding to the commission

18-2058513/29

A/72/PV.105

02/07/2018

of atrocity crimes and in making a difference on the
ground through early warning and preventive action.

of its possible jurisdiction on the forced deportation of
the Rohingya is shrouded in uncertainty.

At this point, our delegation would like to turn to
the Rohingya humanitarian crisis, which Bangladesh
has been forced yet again to deal with since October
2016 and August 2017. The magnitude of the atrocities
involved in the crisis has shaken the world’s conscience,
and the Secretary-General has duly taken the lead in
directing the international community’s attention to this
long-term threat to regional and international security.

The atrocities against the Rohingya committed
in the name of counter-terrorism operations, which
have resulted in the exodus of more than 700,000
people, clearly amounted to a State’s abdication of its
responsibility to protect civilians on its territory. In her
address to the General Assembly in September 2017 (see
A/72/PV.14), our Prime Minister therefore suggested
creating safe zones in Rakhine state to ensure protection
for the vulnerable Rohingya and other communities
there. In order to address the Rohingya’s overriding
concerns about their safety and security, we continue to
advocate for a mechanism to guarantee their protection,
especially given the environment of near-impunity for
the crimes they have recently been subjected to.

The crisis was long in the making, and the apathy
or complacency of the concerned international and
regional actors largely allowed it to reach its current
proportions. It has been particularly disappointing to
note the sheer inadequacy of early-warning messages
from the United Nations presence in Myanmar even
when preparations were reportedly under way for the
atrocities committed by Myanmar security forces
and local vigilantes in Rakhine state last year. Such
inadequacies and omissions have enabled the Myanmar
civilian and military authorities to peddle their
fabricated and toxic narratives about the Rohingya in
the direction of outright denial or the legitimization of
any wrongdoing, let alone admitting to atrocities.
We hope that the recently created possibilities
for United Nations engagement in Rakhine state will
be used for the dual purpose of, first, preventing any
further violence against the remaining Rohingya
population, and secondly, creating a situation conducive
to the voluntary, safe and dignified return of the forcibly
displaced Rohingya in Bangladesh to their homes or
places of choice in Rakhine state. That could be coupled
with efforts to support the development of appropriate
legal and institutional mechanisms for preventing
atrocities at the national level in Myanmar. This is an
opportunity to replicate or adapt good practices already
in place in a host of Member States, including some in
the region.
In the process, the critical question of accountability
for the atrocity crimes committed against the Rohingya,
including against women and children, must remain at
the fore. The national investigation initiatives launched
by Myanmar authorities have so far failed to gain any
credence, and the Human Rights Council’s fact-finding
mission has repeatedly been denied access. According
to reports, the International Criminal Court’s most
recent overture to Myanmar to engage on the question
14/29

Following his visit to the Rohingya camps in Cox’s
Bazar earlier this year, the Secretary-General’s Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide commented on
the responsibility to protect in action in Bangladesh.
He went back to Bangladesh last week to discuss the
possible role of religious leaders in addressing any
fallout from the crisis at the community level.
In tandem with our sustained and progressive
efforts at the national level, Bangladesh will continue
to uphold international humanitarian and human rights
law as part of our contribution to United Nations
peace operations. We reaffirmed these pledges during
our recently concluded Universal Periodic Review
at the Human Rights Council. We remain committed
to promoting the universalization of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide and the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court.
Considering the importance of reconciling with the
past, we seek the international community’s support
in recognizing the genocide committed in Bangladesh
during our War of Liberation in 1971. We look forward
to making an announcement soon on our decision to
join the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, which we support in principle.
Mr. Dinh Nho Hung (Viet Nam): I would like to
express my sincere appreciation to the President of
the General Assembly for convening today’s plenary
meeting to debate the responsibility to protect. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/72/884) entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
18-20585

02/07/2018

A/72/PV.105

early warning to early action”. We acknowledge that
the purpose of this debate is to foster dialogue, trust
and confidence among States on the matter.

the seventy-second session of the General Assembly. I
thank Australia and Ghana. We are pleased to contribute
to this debate today.

Since the 2005 World Summit Outcome document,
the international community has been of one mind
about the common goal of preventing and fighting
against genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. Viet Nam strongly condemns
such crimes and is always ready to work with the
international community to protect civilians from
atrocity crimes.

The doctrine under discussion affirms States’
responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity perpetrated by State or non-State
actors or by their own security forces — and not just the
latter. The first duty of States is the protection of their
populations from actual harm or threats to their safety
and well-being. That is the basis of State legitimacy.
But a State fails in its responsibility to protect as much
by failing to use every effective means to protect its
population from harm as by abusing them itself.
This happens when States give way to terrorism and
organized crime instead of combating them.

Viet Nam is of the view that States have the
primary responsibility to protect their own citizens
from such crimes. The responsibility for early warning
also rests with States first and foremost. However, the
establishment of early-warning measures should be
in accordance with specific national circumstances.
We also believe that international assistance is most
effective and sustainable when it is based on the needs
and wishes of the people in the countries concerned and
provided in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law.
Our discussion of this issue should always be guided
by the overriding purpose of the Organization, which is
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
In that spirit, we believe that all disputes and differences
should be resolved through peaceful means and in
conformity with international law. At the same time,
it is vital that we address the root causes of conflicts,
ending all forms of discrimination, including ethnic
and religious discrimination. We support initiatives
and international cooperation aimed at hunger
eradication, sustainable development, climate-change
adaptation, capacity-building, the promotion of gender
equality, ensuring the improvement in the conditions
of vulnerable groups and eliminating all forms
of discrimination.
We are of the view that the inclusion of the
responsibility to protect as a standing item on the
agenda of the General Assembly should require the
widest possible convergence of views among States
Members of the United Nations. Viet Nam is committed
to engaging in constructive, positive and cooperative
dialogue with all Members States to reach common
ground on these issues on the basis of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Locsin (Philippines): The Philippines
supported the inclusion of this item on the agenda of

Prevention is at the core of the responsibility to
protect. National institutions for good governance
should therefore be strengthened, especially where
fighting organized crime and terrorism is concerned.
There is also the importance of ensuring strong
national defence against genocide-prone foreign State
and non-State actors, as well as reforming democracy
in order to prevent Government from capture by violent
groups, such as intolerant mass movements or organized
crime, as in the case of the drug trade. The perpetrators
of organized crime or terrorism are not congregations
of the accused entitled to the presumption of innocence
and to be treated accordingly even when they are caught
in the act. That presumption attaches once they have
been brought before a court of law, or the concept of
suspects in law enforcement would not exist.
We must professionalize security forces so that
they can protect their own citizens without harming
them. The concept of collateral damage has no more
place in police and security operations than does the
suggestion of yielding to enemies without a fight in
order to limit suffering.
We should instil values opposed to extremism,
criminality and terrorism, while promoting tolerance
and law-abiding pluralism. But criminality and
terrorism are not aspects of diversity nor features of
plurality. They are what they are. We must address the
roots of terrorism, but once terrorism has taken root,
grown and started to bear militant fruit, addressing it
must go hand in hand with pulling out the growth before
it scatters its seeds farther afield to take root, grow and
flourish in more places. That must be done with the

18-2058515/29

A/72/PV.105

strictest regard for human rights and without hurting
the innocent, for the blood of the innocent fertilizes the
ground for terrorism to take root and grow.
We support the Secretary-General in putting
prevention at the centre of the United Nations peace
and security reform agenda, but part of prevention is
discouraging the misuse for political purposes of the
concept of the responsibility to protect in order to justify
foreign intervention in domestic law enforcement. That
discredits it, and invites the view that it is objective
collusion with the evil that the State seeks to stamp
out. The road to hell resounds with the footfalls of
the sanctimonious.
It is important to strengthen early-warning
mechanisms to ensure that they lead to early action,
but early warning does not include delaying the basic
State function of stopping crime. The challenge for the
responsibility to protect is to balance consistency and
predictability in the rule of law with an appreciation
of the uniqueness of each case, but in every case we
must acknowledge the universality of norms of right
and wrong. They remain opposites. While one might
disagree about what is right, let alone perfect in all
circumstances and practical in some, there can be no
doubt about what is wrong and the necessity to fight
it in every case. We cannot accept moral relativism.
There are Asian attitudes, but imagining that there
are distinctly Asian values of right and wrong is pure
nonsense. We cannot accept that there are no such
things as good and evil but, like beauty and ugliness in
the eye of the beholder, the dichotomy can be resolved
at the convenience of the actor. Moral relativity is the
greatest evil.
Our assessment of every possible case of failure
of the responsibility to protect must be impartial and
evidence based, free from politics and double standards.
It excludes the selective use of the veto in possible
responsibility-to-protect situations by the Security
Council’s permanent five, in pathetic exhibitions of
efforts to revive colonial influence.
We must ensure that when we identify vulnerable
populations, those who make criminal career choices
are not considered as vulnerable to anything but the
inexorable enforcement of the law. The Constitution of
the Philippines values the dignity of every person and
protects the most vulnerable — women, children and
the poor — who become victims of mass atrocity crimes
that they frequently cannot flee, and when they can, it
16/29

02/07/2018

is only to be turned away at the borders of places of
greater safety across the sea. Our Constitution protects
the law-abiding who are victims of the lawless. And it
is not the responsibility of States to protect the lawless,
other than according them the most basic rights of the
accused after they have submitted to the authority of
the State.
We support the Secretary-General’s call to
strengthen the role of women in the prevention of
atrocity crimes. Women are at the forefront of our peace
processes; they are the most likely to become victims of
conflict and the first to recognize conflict’s futility and
excuse for savagery.
The Secretary-General encourages States to sign,
ratify and implement basic instruments of international
law on this subject, including the Rome Statute, but the
commitment to protecting and advancing human rights,
including the right to equal safety from criminality and
abusive State authority, survives and far exceeds the
obligation to remain in agencies that were designed for
their enforcement but that have compromised themselves
in that task. Bonds are sacred, but institutions are
merely the sum of the people who occupy them.
Despite all of this, mass atrocity crimes and inhuman
crimes committed against a handful of people, or even
one — the baby face down on the beach; girls set on fire
in iron cages; civilians bombed to test the puissance
of the new Condor Legions in Yemen; old men, young
men and boys shot out of hand; wives, mothers, women
and girls gang-raped and trafficked — and only because
they are Christians in the Middle East or Muslims in
South-East Asia. All must stop or be stopped, whatever
it takes, regardless of sovereignty, in the name of
humankind beyond borders.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): It is with great
pleasure that I am addressing the General Assembly on
behalf of Portugal on this topic of concern to all of us.
We are fully aligned with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union (see A/72/
PV.99), and I would like to add additional remarks in
my national capacity.
Let me first thank the Secretary-General for his
report (А/72/884), on the follow-up to the outcome
of the 2005 World Summit. Portugal fully shares
his views. In today’s world we must be aware of
our collective responsibility to protect vulnerable
18-20585

02/07/2018

populations should States fail to protect their citizens
from the worst atrocities.
Portugal fully endorses the common pledge to
promote and strengthen the principle of the responsibility
to protect on the basis of a threefold strategy — first,
strengthening existing capacities; secondly, promoting
accountability; and lastly, innovating for prevention
through civil society. We urge all States to support the
inclusion of the responsibility to protect as a standing
item on the agenda of the General Assembly, and we
commend Australia and Ghana for their leadership,
as well as the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.
We call on the Security Council to further expand its
early-warning tools and reinforce the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We would like to point to our support to
the French-Mexican initiative on the suspension of the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocity, as well as the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group with regard to timely and decisive
action by the Security Council against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes.
We have an obligation to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity on the basis of international
human rights standards. Portugal therefore recognizes
the pivotal role of the Human Rights Council in
proactively implementing early-warning and earlyaction mechanisms to prevent violent conflicts and
mass atrocity crimes. We also want to reiterate our
continued support and recognition of the work of the
United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and
Responsibility to Protect and to thank the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, and the former Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, for their guidance. We commend both
Mexico and Finland for co-hosting the eighth meeting
of the Global Network of R2P Focal Points.
Portugal reaffirms its full commitment to
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and special political
missions in order to prevent outbreaks and relapses into
conflict. We participate in numerous United Nations
missions, deploying more than 200 members our of
military and security forces. We also endorse the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, which guide
our forces in field operations.

A/72/PV.105

In conclusion, it is our collective obligation to be
fully united on the responsibility to protect. While
the primary responsibility lies with each and every
country, Portugal believes that the United Nations
is the central platform for pursuing the debate and
looking for action-driven solutions, when needed, in
full coordination with the States concerned.
Mr. Mikayilli (Azerbaijan): The delegation of
Azerbaijan thanks the President for convening this first
formal debate on the responsibility to protect since
2009. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his most recent report on the subject, entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to
early action” (A/72/884).
Thirteen years ago, Member States made a
commitment to protecting their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. However, as noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the gap between that commitment and
the experience of vulnerable populations has grown.
Wars and armed conflicts continue to rage in many parts
of the world. The erosion of international humanitarian
law further increases human suffering, with women and
children paying the highest price in conflict situations.
Hate speech, incitement to hatred and xenophobia are
on the rise across the globe. The number of refugees
and internally displaced persons has already reached
a record level of 65 million. Forced displacement is
increasingly used as a method of war.
Member States must address the mismatch between
promises and action. First and foremost, the root
causes of armed conflict should be tackled to reverse
this negative trend. In that regard, the international
community should condemn any occupations of
Member States or acts of aggression committed against
them, and fully respect their sovereignty and territorial
integrity. All parties should respect international
humanitarian and human rights law, combat impunity,
enhance accountability and strengthen their capacity
and national ownership in protecting populations.
The primary responsibility to protect populations
from atrocity crimes rests with States. As underlined by
many speakers during these deliberations, prevention is
the most effective form of protection.
The early identification and tracking of atrocity
crime factors is crucial to that end. The promotion
of mutual tolerance and peaceful coexistence could
also be a very powerful tool in building resilience to

18-2058517/29

A/72/PV.105

atrocity crimes. We also note that the Secretary-General
highlights inclusive and sustainable development as
the best form of prevention against all kinds of risks,
including the risk of atrocity crimes.
that

The World Summit Outcome document stipulates
[t]he international community, through the
United Nations, also has the responsibility to use
appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other
peaceful means, in accordance with Chapters VI and
VIII of the Charter, to help to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity” (resolution 60/1, para.
139).

Regrettably, narrow political interests, double
standards and selectivity have prevailed, international
law is becoming ineffective and the credibility of
institutions such as the United Nations and regional
organizations is being eroded. Not all grave violations
of international and human rights law receive due
attention and a response at the international level. The
conspicuous silence in certain instances, particularly in
situations of military aggression and foreign occupation,
and total disregard of a number of Security Council
resolutions, serves to accentuate a deficiency that is
characteristic of the international community today.
Divergent views persist on the nature, scope
and application of the responsibility to protect. The
Secretary-General, in his statement, also referred
to fear and concerns among Member States about
the concept. We therefore need more discussion to
identify common ground and reach consensus on the
responsibility to protect.
It is critical to ensure that actions in fulfilling
the responsibility to protect are undertaken only in
conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The responsibility
to protect should never be used to pursue political
objectives, intervene in the internal affairs of States or
undermine States’ sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence. Furthermore, this concept must
not be applied in a selective manner.
In conclusion, we look forward to further
discussions in order to bridge the differences on the
points of contention around the responsibility to protect.
Ms. Cerrato (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate the President of the
18/29

02/07/2018

General Assembly for scheduling this formal debate
on the responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, as such a debate has not taken
place since 2009. It is a unique opportunity for States
Members of the United Nations to promote dialogue
on action aimed at implementing the responsibility to
protect on the basis of what was agreed at the 2005
World Summit. My delegation would also like to thank
the Permanent Representatives of Australia and Ghana
for their efforts last year to ensure that this item was
included on the agenda of the General Assembly,
something that Honduras fully supported.
My country welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Responsibility to protect: from early
warning to early action” (A/72/884) and supports
his strategy for prioritizing prevention across all the
United Nations pillars, considering the importance of
implementing the responsibility to protect.
To that end, my delegation believes that it is
essential to strengthen international cooperation in
order to respond to the major challenges currently facing
developing countries, while respecting international
human rights, international humanitarian law and
refugee and migrant law. Similarly, the responsibility to
protect must not be dissociated from efforts to achieve
genuine and sustainable peace, which contribute to
the strengthening of international peace and security
by ensuring the full participation of women and young
people in all areas of society, particularly in prevention
and the building of a genuine peace.
For Honduras, the responsibility to protect is a
priority, and although much remains to be done, in
recent years joint action has been undertaken by the
public sector, including our National Congress, our
secretariat for human rights, security and defence, as
well as academia and civil society.
The State of Honduras has made significant
progress in this area with the adoption in 2017 of a new
criminal code, which, in the framework of our adopted
regulations, establishes penalties for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and sets out in
detail the type of penalty applicable to each of these
types of crimes against the international community.
I would also like to point out that Honduras is a
member of and active participant in the Latin American
Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention, a
unique regional forum for implementing national and
18-20585

02/07/2018

regional initiatives aimed at genocide prevention and
education in the ministries of the participating Latin
American countries.
Similarly, we have incorporated the topic of
genocide and mass atrocities, with a preventive focus,
into the training curriculum for public servants and
members of the Honduran armed forces and published
educational material with a focus on preventing
discrimination in that area. In addition, public servants
of the human rights secretariat and other Government
institutions have received training from the Auschwitz
Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, for which we
express our gratitude.
In conclusion, I would like to express my country’s
commitment to the Rome Statute and, together with the
relevant national, regional and international bodies,
to continuing to make progress in preventing atrocity
crimes and in terms of the responsibility to protect the
people of Honduras.
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): Papua New Guinea
joins previous speakers in complimenting the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, on his
important and timely report (A/72/884) on implementing
the responsibility to protect and on accountability and
prevention. I also want to thank Ambassadors Bird of
Australia and Pobee of Ghana for their leadership on
this important issue.
Given the great wars and consequential atrocities
of the twentieth century, their unabated continuation
this century is in itself a wake-up call to our common
humanity and all Governments to be on the alert to
take immediate remedial action where situations of
atrocity crimes arise. It was in that context that world
leaders, in 2005, adopted the World Summit Outcome
document, on the responsibility to protect citizens from
mass atrocity crimes such as genocide, ethnic cleansing,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The Secretary-General’s report’s key messages
are crystal-clear and put all Member States on notice,
as primary-responsibility custodians, to do more
to protect innocent people from atrocity crimes,
especially women and children, who have often been
used as human shields and suffered sexual violence,
among other crimes. All nation States must work both
individually and collectively to prevent devastating
atrocity crimes, in defence of our common humanity.
Civil-society groups and faith-based religious groups

A/72/PV.105

should also support all national and international
efforts in that regard.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
responsibility to protect is enshrined in international
human rights and humanitarian law, as well as the
constitutions and legal jurisprudence of all States.
It is a tragic fact that atrocity crimes continue to be
perpetrated, violating human rights under both national
and international humanitarian law. Nation States often
find themselves helpless to contain such crimes, all too
often owing to a lack of capacity to prevent insurgency
within national borders. When this is the case, nation
States, within any given regional grouping, should
collaborate and deploy combined regional resources,
including security forces, to address such situations
with a swift humanitarian response.
Papua New Guinea, a country still recovering from
conflict, is fully aware of the serious negative impact
that atrocity crimes have on those directly affected. It
takes generations to fully recover from them. In this
regard, the United Nations continues to play a pivotal
role in all post-conflict peacebuilding and rehabilitation
situations, in Papua New Guinea and elsewhere. But it
should not be seen or taken for granted as the sole player
in this respect. Those who commit atrocity crimes must
also be brought to justice. The Organization is only as
good as its Members want it to be, and that means it
must be provided with the appropriate resources for
undertaking the task of sustaining peace.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Tito, the representative of
Kiribati, on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum (see
A/72/PV.99). Ambassador Tito, a former President of
Kiribati, presided over the Pacific Islands Forum that
adopted the Biketawa Declaration in 2000. Pacific
Island Forum leaders wanted to give priority to the
early-warning and early-action approach collectively
in order to deal with possible atrocity crimes in the
region. That is the Pacific way, our response to the
second pillar of the responsibility to protect, translated
into action.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation listened carefully to the
presentation delivered by Secretary-General Guterres
and has taken note of his report on the issue of the
responsibility to protect (A/72/884). We would like to
make the following observations.

18-2058519/29

A/72/PV.105

02/07/2018

First, we must uphold the principle that the
Governments of all countries have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, along with
the principle of the ownership of Member States.
The responsibility to protect the people ultimately
rests with each Government, consistent with the
principle of sovereignty. When addressing crises, the
international community should therefore fully respect
the sovereignty of the countries concerned, abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and uphold the principles of sovereign equality
and non-interference in internal affairs.

protect civilians. The international community should
give priority to dialogue, consultation, negotiation,
mediation, good offices and other peaceful means for
solving problems. The use of force in enforcement
measures and the authorization to use force should be
considered only when all peaceful measures have been
exhausted. It should also be in line with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations. Military action
taken by the international community to protect
civilians must be authorized by the Security Council
with strict conditions attached and explicit methods
of implementation.

Based on respect for the leadership of the countries
concerned, the international community should provide
constructive assistance when necessary. In the current
context, all parties should foster the concept of a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security and strive to build a community for the shared
future of humankind. This is the fundamental longterm approach to protecting the peoples of all countries.

Now that Member States are paying heightened
attention to the issue of the responsibility to protect, we
hope that the discussions held in the General Assembly
will help them to build consensus and refrain from
imposing controversial initiatives.

Secondly, we must faithfully implement the 2005
World Summit Outcome document, which states that
the application of the responsibility to protect is strictly
restricted to genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. This formulation is
a balanced one and a compromise negotiated by all
countries, and all parties should therefore refrain
from expanding or arbitrarily interpreting, distorting
or abusing it. The principle of leadership by Member
States should be upheld in the discussion of the concept
of the responsibility to protect.
Thirdly, prevention and increasing preventive
diplomacy efforts are important. China notes that the
Secretary-General’s report proposes a series of measures
regarding early warning and early action, such as
strengthening the capacity-building of Member States,
solving problems by political means and fully leveraging
the roles of United Nations agencies and regional and
subregional organizations. China appreciates this
reflection of a focus on prevention.
In the light of their circumstances, the countries
concerned should strengthen prevention efforts by
identifying their own weaknesses and the possible
risks they face and try to address the root causes of the
conflict, with a view to addressing both the symptoms
and sources of the problem.
Fourthly, we must exercise caution when using
force and should strive to use non-military measures to
20/29

Mr. Beleffi (San Marino): First of all, I would like
to welcome the inclusion of the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity on the formal
agenda of this session of the General Assembly and
support including it as a standing item.
The Government of the Republic of San Marino
is deeply concerned about and firmly condemns
the growing number of attacks on civilians,
schools, hospitals, places of worship, peacekeepers,
humanitarian workers and journalists. We affirm our
commitment to the principles underpinning the norms
of the responsibility to protect and to obligations
under human rights and humanitarian law such as
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, which marks its seventieth
anniversary this year.
Prevention and accountability play a vital role
in preventing and stopping atrocity crimes. We fully
support the Secretary-General’s focus on prevention as
a primary aspect of our Organization and a meaningful
approach to averting large-scale violations and abuses
of human rights and humanitarian law. We emphasize
the importance of all available preventive tools,
including dialogue, mediation and diplomacy, to stop
and prevent the escalation of any mass atrocity crimes.
The International Criminal Court remains crucial
in the fight against impunity for genocide and crimes
against humanity and represents a core element in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect. Through
18-20585

02/07/2018

its work, the Court helps to foster accountability and
therefore promote prevention and reconciliation.
We commend initiatives such as the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
regarding Security Council action on genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and France
and Mexico’s declaration on voluntary restraint in
the use of the veto by the permanent members of the
Security Council.
San Marino supports the work of the Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect and their work in mainstreaming this topic
within the United Nations system. The United Nations
system can play a substantive role in mass atrocity
prevention. As underlined in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/72/884), early warning must be systematically
linked to decision-making about early action.
By making better use of the instruments at their
disposal, the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council can move effectively
from early warning to early action and therefore make
a big difference in the prevention of atrocity crimes. We
would also like to underline the important role played
by civil society, the business sector and religious and
traditional leaders. Civilian action has great potential
for easing tension and preventing violence.
Today we are seeing devastating humanitarian
crises and more than 65 million civilians displaced
by atrocities and conflict. The rule of law and strong
multilateral institutions are particularly crucial right
now if we want to bridge the gap between our words of
commitment and the atrocities suffered by vulnerable
populations. We must act with determination and in a
united and concerted fashion. It is our individual and
collective duty to continue working for the realization
of the responsibility to protect.
Ms. Prizreni (Albania): Albania fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union (see A/72/PV.99). I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacity.
Promoting the responsibility to protect domestically
and internationally has been a long-standing policy
priority for Albania. That is why we have supported
the inclusion of the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity on the formal agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session.

A/72/PV.105

We welcome this first formal debate on responsibility
to protect since 2009, which we believe represents an
important opportunity for the States Members of the
United Nations to reaffirm their commitments made
at the 2005 World Summit regarding the responsibility
to protect. Albania also supports the inclusion of the
responsibility to protect as a standing item on the
Assembly’s agenda. In that regard, my country would
welcome the adoption of a resolution reaffirming the
commitment of Member States to the norm.
Reaffirming our commitment to the responsibility
to protect will never be enough. Prioritizing and
investing meaningfully in the prevention of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity should increase in order to deal with the many
challenges that remain. In that connection, we would
like to emphasize the important role that the Human
Rights Council and human rights mechanisms such as
the Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
mandate holders can play in preventing and responding
to mass atrocity crimes.
I also want to emphasize that ensuring accountability
for mass atrocity crimes is one of the best ways to
prevent their recurrence. On 17 July we will mark the
twentieth anniversary of the International Criminal
Court. Albania fully supports the Court and considers
it a vital institutional development in the battle to end
impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. In that connection, I emphasize that States
have the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute crimes committed within their jurisdiction.
National accountability efforts should be encouraged
and supported, including by strengthening judicial
cooperation between States and at the regional level.
We also need a special focus on sexual and
gender-based violence, which is increasingly used as a
deliberate strategy by State and non-State perpetrators.
When widespread or systematic, such acts may amount
to crimes against humanity, war crimes or genocide. It
is never too late to hold the perpetrators accountable,
achieve justice for the victims and thereby prevent
further abuses.
In 2013, Albania appointed a national focal point for
the responsibility to protect and has actively participated
in the Global Network of R2P Focal Points, which
we consider a very solid platform for sharing lessons
learned and best practices for advancing and upholding
the responsibility to protect, as well as for highlighting

18-2058521/29

A/72/PV.105

successful national and regional initiatives that have
contributed to the prevention of mass atrocity crimes.
We encourage Member States to appoint a national
focal point for the responsibility to protect and to build
their national and collective capacities to prevent mass
atrocity crimes. We also encourage them to support
national institutional capacities in implementing the
responsibility to protect in the light of specific situations
in the country, as well as for early prevention.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela thanks the Secretary-General
for presenting his report (see A/72/PV.99) on “The
responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884). We confirm our position on the
treatment of this issue within the framework of the
General Assembly, in the belief that the concept
continues to raise serious differences and concerns
among States Members of the United Nations. That is
due mainly to the lack of definitions of its concept and
scope, which deepens divisions among the membership.
The concept has been the subject of severe criticism
and questioning by a significant number of countries,
including Venezuela, that continue to consider that it
runs counter to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
sovereign equality of States, as well as being in clear
contradiction of the principles of non-intervention in
the internal affairs of States, self-determination, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining from the
threat or use of force. Those postulates must be fully
observed if we are to maintain international peace
and security.
Our reservations about the respnsibility to protect
are based on the consequences of the traumatic
experiences of various armed interventions and military
aggressions against peoples and countries designed
to promote the overthrow of Governments, causing
the destabilization and institutional dismantling of
States. The ambiguity and legal gaps in the concept’s
definition, together with its selective application, make
its applicability as a principle of international law
illegitimate.
Venezuela reiterates its firm commitment to the
importance of preventing crimes against humanity,
war, genocide and ethnic cleansing, and condemns
any practice aimed at the commission of those serious
crimes. However, we believe that their prevention must
be based on promoting dialogue and peaceful solutions
22/29

02/07/2018

to conflicts, based on Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, not on military interventions or acts
of aggression with disastrous consequences for the
peoples whose rights the aggressors claim to defend.
This is therefore a matter of how we can contribute
to the effective implementation of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.
For our country, the responsibility to protect our
citizens, including by promoting and respecting human
rights,belongs to the State, based on the exercise of its
sovereignty and political independence. We are aware
that this prerogative can at no point be used to commit
crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide or ethnic
cleansing. However, the concept of the responsibility
to protect cannot be equated with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Venezuela believes that important differences
persist within our Organization regarding the content
and scope of the concept of the responsibility to protect.
We therefore call for discussion of it to be resumed in
an informal format, in order to build the necessary
consensus on its nature and scope. The inclusion of an
issue that has important political and legal implications
must derive from a transparent and inclusive debate
process resulting in a common position that reflects the
agreement of all Members. We hope that the views of
the sovereign States that make up the United Nations
are taken into account in order to foster the necessary
consensus on such a significant issue. We believe that
informal discussions continue to be a good forum to
exchange views and produce that consensus.
The differences we have seen today undermine the
agreement reached in this Organization in 2005, which
the General Assembly already broke in September 2017.
They threaten any possibility of reaching a consensus on
the nature and scope of the concept of the responsibility
to protect. We are aware of its negative implications
for the peaceful coexistence of nations by rendering
essential principles such as respect for sovereignty,
political independence and the self-determination
of peoples conditional and relative.
The report of the Secretary-General recommends
the implementation of a concept on which there is
no agreement. We are deeply concerned that the
intention is to promote the use of certain bodies of this
Organization to validate interventions under the guise
of the responsibility to protect, making it appear to be
a cross-cutting issue. The legitimacy of the proposed
18-20585

02/07/2018

actions must be based on a consensus, which, as we can
see, is far from being the case right now.
Finally, Venezuela reiterates its willingness to
continue working on this issue in the informal dialogue
format that has been used since 2009. We believe that
formula will enable us to progress towards a common
base as we define the elements of the concept of the
responsibility to protect.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia, as a State that believes in
peace and promotes the culture of peace, has always
advocated the resolution of conflict through negotiation,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement
and preventive diplomacy, in accordance with the
established purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
With that as our understanding, and as a country
that respects international law and the need to protect
human rights, we join the universal pacts, treaties and
conventions that establish the responsibility of States
to ensure that they are fully exercised and enjoyed.
As a reflection of our commitment to the fight against
impunity when those rights are violated, we signed the
Rome Statute, which sets out mechanisms to punish
and prosecute crimes against humanity, war crimes
and genocide.
In view of that, Bolivia believes that the
responsibility to protect is an exclusive obligation of
States to their populations, and a primary duty that
should be reflected by respecting, guaranteeing and
promoting fundamental rights.
Paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World Summit
Outcome document of 2005 recall the obligation
incumbent on all States to protect their peoples from
crimes against humanity, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and genocide. It is essential that we work together and in
consensus to define the concepts and scope implied by
the responsibility to protect. This responsibility is not
a principle but rather a concept, whose characteristics,
rules of implementation and evaluation mechanisms are
far from being defined and agreed on. Without a clear
definition and with imprecise terms to support it, the
responsibility to protect has a high risk of becoming
a mechanism for interfering in the internal affairs of
States or being used selectively as a tool to achieve
political gains.

A/72/PV.105

While we take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(A/72/884) and recognize the key role of the United
Nations in identifying and issuing early warnings in
situations that could become human rights violations,
we reiterate that any action considered as implementing
the responsibility to protect must unquestionably
belong in a framework of respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. It must
seek to build capacities, not undermine or impair them.
That includes the prohibition of the implementation of
policies of intervention or interference. We therefore
reiterate that any action or threat of unilateral action
against a State runs counter to the principles of
multilateralism, international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
It is important to bear in mind that interventionism
and regime-change policies carried out as so-called
preventive or humanitarian interventions have left
gaps in State structures that can tragically lead to
chaos, extremism, the proliferation of terrorism and the
militarization of entire regions, which, unfortunately,
continue to occupy the attention of our Organization.
In that understanding, if we really do desire to
prevent and avoid humanitarian disasters, the root
causes of such situations must be addressed. They
include underdevelopment, poverty, inequality, social
exclusion, food insecurity, lack of access to safe water,
the implementation of selective unilateral embargoes
and other structural problems that exacerbate conflicts
until they become unsustainable situations.
In conclusion, we note that the report of the
Secretary-General does not reflect the concerns
expressed by several States regarding the need to agree
on a conceptual and methodological framework for the
scope and limits of the responsibility to protect, although
those concerns were recognized during his presentation
in the informal dialogue held on 6 September 2017. Until
those elements have been duly studied, clarified, agreed
on, accepted and recognized by all States, this subject
should therefore not be considered or established as a
permanent item on the agenda of the General Assembly.
Mr. Zhemeney (Kazakhstan): My delegation would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly
for convening this meeting. We hope that today’s
discussion will foster consensus among Member States
on this important topic.
Kazakhstan reaffirms its commitments to
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit

18-2058523/29

A/72/PV.105

Outcome document and, as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, considers it a moral imperative
to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. In
our commitment to that objective, we have therefore
joined the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.
We support the concept of the responsibility to
protect and its three reinforcing pillars. At the same
time, opinions still differ about the concept of the
responsibility to protect, with contradictory perceptions
of the right to sovereignty and territorial integrity versus
the use of force. We must therefore reflect the concerns
of all Member States, define accurate criteria with
respect to the application of the pillars and principles
of the responsibility to protect and create impartial,
balanced, objective and depoliticized decision-making
mechanisms. We should also review and analyse both
successful and unsuccessful experiences in preventing
atrocity crimes.
We acknowledge that Governments bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of their own
citizens and emphasize that any use of force should be a
measure of last resort, duly authorized by the Security
Council on a case-by-case basis, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
We have carefully examined the latest report of
Secretary-General Guterres (A/72/884) and share his
views on the importance of prioritizing prevention
across all the pillars of the work of the United Nations.
We fully support his assertion that inclusive and
sustainable development is the best form of prevention
against all kinds of risks. We therefore underscore
the need for strengthened international cooperation
in building a sustainable world with basic services
and protected human rights. It is critical to support
Member States in addressing the root causes of
conflict, including chronic poverty, illiteracy, food
insecurity and the adverse effects of climate change.
Equally important is capacity-building for more
effective and accountable institutions, appropriate
legislation and security and justice reform. We believe
that our preventive efforts will succeed only if they
rely on dialogue, confidence-building measures and
establishing partnerships with all relevant parties.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Kazakhstan is committed to working closely with
24/29

02/07/2018

all the relevant parties to ensure the full protection
of populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
the President for convening the first formal General
Assembly debate in nine years on the responsibility
to protect. The United Arab Emirates welcomes the
renewed focus on an important concept in our global
foreign-policy toolkit. Today’s reinvigoration of the
discussion of the responsibility to protect in the current
global context is very timely. The United Arab Emirates
believes that a better understanding of the responsibility
to protect can be reached through discussions like this
one, and to that end, we support this year’s inclusion of
the responsibility to protect as a stand-alone item on the
agenda of the General Assembly.
With time, the historical memory of atrocities and
crimes against humanity fades and the significance of
“never again” wanes. However, we must not forget the
events, actions and inaction that led to such atrocities,
and we must dedicate ourselves to preserving our
shared memory of them. Through political events and
the context of crises — although they are different today
from what they were in Srebrenica and Rwanda, more
than 20 years ago — we are still seeing States failing
to protect their own populations from atrocity crimes.
The nature of today’s crises has raised questions
about the viability of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, given today’s geopolitical realities — questions
such as how we can uphold this principle when non-State
actors are shaping conflicts. What about when conflict
endures for years and, in some cases, decades? Who
shoulders the responsibility to protect — is it Member
States, international legal bodies or new institutions
altogether? And in assuming that responsibility,
what are the right tools for protecting civilians from
atrocity crimes?
There is also the question of the status of the
responsibility to protect when the international bodies
tasked with defending peace and security struggle to
reach a consensus and take action. Arguably, in various
cases, Security Council paralysis has contributed to
prolonging violent conflict around the world, and to
address that, the United Arab Emirates supports the
initiative led by France and Mexico on limiting the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities and the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group.
18-20585

02/07/2018

The United Arab Emirates joins others here
today in reaffirming our shared commitment to the
responsibility to protect, as endorsed in the 2005
World Summit Outcome document. We believe that the
responsibility to protect populations from crimes against
humanity rests, first and foremost, with sovereign
States. However, in this context, we believe that the
concept of sovereignty is a right with a concomitant
responsibility. A sovereign State’s responsibility to
protect extends to addressing the root causes of conflict
and, where necessary, seeking assistance and technical
support from regional partners, the United Nations and
its Member States.
Furthermore, it is only as a matter of last resort,
when a State has clearly violated its obligations
under international law and has failed to fulfil its the
responsibility to protect, that intervention is warranted.
Any intervention or military action that might come
with upholding the responsibility to protect could be
undertaken only with the consent of the sovereign State
in question or when authorized by the Security Council,
and it therefore strengthens the Security Council’s
toolkit of responses to crises.
The Secretary-General has outlined a robust
threefold strategy for strengthening early action,
including promoting accountability for atrocity
prevention. The United Arab Emirates stresses that
ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes is
vital to preventing their recurrence.
In our own region, we continue to experience
multiple armed conflicts with severe repercussions
for civilian communities. In that context, doubts about
precise facts and figures can lead to impunity for
those who commit atrocities. One way to objectively
verify such crimes is to create agreed-on mechanisms
for collecting data that is beyond dispute, so that the
international community can react promptly and
responsibly to major developments. Another way is
reinforcement through legal frameworks set up by
international bodies, as the Security Council did
with resolution 2379 (2017), which established an
investigative team tasked with collecting, storing and
preserving evidence of Da’esh’s crimes in Iraq.
In collecting data and understanding developments
on the ground, civilians can play a role in early warning
and assessment and in bringing situations of concern
to the attention of the international community, as
the Secretary-General has rightly highlighted in his

A/72/PV.105

report (A/72/884). Although the State’s responsibility
to protect is owed to its people, civilians should not be
treated merely as silent beneficiaries. They are partners,
and civilian action helps to prevent atrocity crimes.
The United Arab Emirates concurs with others
that we can collectively reaffirm our commitment here
today by first supporting the Secretary-General and his
focus on prevention so as to address the root causes of
conflict before intervention is required. How do we do
that? Clearly, strengthening the role of women in the
prevention of atrocity crimes supports that goal. As the
Secretary-General makes clear in his report, research
tells us that gender equality and the full inclusion of
women in peace processes, and as preventive actors,
greatly reduces a society’s exposure to risks of violence,
including atrocity crimes.
Furthermore, atrocity prevention must fully reflect
the tenets laid out in the women and peace and security
agenda and in resolution 1325 (2000). We must ensure
that women are empowered and supported as agents
of change in atrocity prevention. The United Arab
Emirates encourages the continued cooperation, as
called for by the Secretary-General, of his Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and, when
appointed, on the Responsibility to Protect, with UNWomen, the relevant mandate holders and regional
actors to achieve that goal. Prevention efforts must also
include an established and institutionalized programme
for bringing in the voices of young people.
Secondly, it is imperative to shift the dialogues
on the responsibility to protect out of New York and
into regions and capitals, so that we can find regional
and national solutions. To that end, the SecretaryGeneral’s report rightly highlights the importance of
regional and subregional arrangements, linking them
to decision-making on early action in preventing
atrocities and responding effectively to risks of atrocity
crimes. Such arrangements can be further developed by
reviewing and enhancing preventive capacities, as well
as sharing those best practices with Member States here
in New York.
Thirdly and finally, committing to a robust human
rights regime is key to the prevention agenda. That
includes an emphasis on strong institutions and good
governance at the regional and international levels.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this debate.

18-2058525/29

A/72/PV.105

Fiji aligns its statement with that delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Kiribati on behalf of the
members of the Pacific Island Forum (see A/72/PV.99).
We would like to add the following comments in our
national capacity.
We would like to express our great appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his briefing (see A/72/
PV.99) and comprehensive report (A/72/884), whose
recommendations we commend and support.
This is our first time in the debate on the
responsibility to protect. Fiji adds its voice in favour
of including the responsibility to protect as a recurring
item on the General Assembly’s agenda. We have an
obligation to our communities, which look to the
United Nations to provide protection from crimes
against humanity and genocide. The obligation falls
to us to take appropriate measures to safeguard lives
and protect communities when their lives are at risk. It
falls to us to ensure that the international system acts
in time, proactively and decisively. We should therefore
provide a clear pathway with regard to the responsibility
to protect.
I want to stress the importance that national,
regional and global institutions have in protecting lives.
The Human Rights Council is vital to the responsibility
to protect. Fiji recognizes that the Council needs to do
its job better, and we are therefore seeking membership
in the Council to pursue that agenda. It is a small but
important starting point.
Fiji is committed to the principle of the responsibility
to protect, a commitment we reaffirmed in the 1970s
when we began to deploy Fijian peacekeepers in very
difficult regions of the world. Although we have
lost lives in upholding the responsibility to protect
civilians, we have remained steadfast. We believe
that strengthening United Nations peacekeeping is a
fundamental part of the overall United Nations strategy
and toolkit for protecting people from mass atrocities
and prevent war crimes.
We agree with the finding of the Secretary-General
that accountability for atrocity prevention should
be considerably enhanced. Fiji looks forward to the
speedy appointment of a new Special Adviser to work
with all stakeholders in ensuring that the responsibility
to protect is a feature of peacekeeping training and
deployment. Peacekeeping, human rights and the
responsibility to protect are part of a continuum. The
Secretary-General’s initiative will ensure a greater
26/29

02/07/2018

focus on strengthening that interrelationship. It will
both complement and help to reinforce the regional
efforts in the South Pacific through the Biketawa Plus
initiative, which some of my colleagues mentioned last
week. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Australia and Ghana for their bold leadership in driving
the agenda and look forward to working with the
Assembly in forging a consensus on the responsibility
to protect as soon as possible.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to congratulate the
President of the General Assembly on the initiative
to convene today’s debate on the responsibility to
protect. We would also like to congratulate Ghana and
Australia on their efforts to include the issue as part
of the formal agenda of the General Assembly. We
commend Secretary-General António Guterres on his
determination to make the issue an absolute priority.
As the Assembly knows, civilians account for the
vast majority of victims in armed conflicts marked by
ongoing and very serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Gabon is of the view that any attack
on civilians is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law. The responsibility to protect people and prevent
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity lies primarily with States, both in
times of peace and during war. That responsibility also
extends to protecting refugee camps. I also want to
take this opportunity to reiterate Gabon’s commitment
to international criminal justice and the fight against
impunity so as to ensure that those responsible for
serious crimes are held accountable for their actions
before competent national or international courts.
My country affirms its commitment to the standards
set by the responsibility to protect, particularly the
implementation of the three pillars — prevention,
encouraging the international community and
collective action in the case of a State’s failure. I take
this opportunity to commend the Secretary-General on
his personal commitment to preventing conflict in the
world, which is the best antidote to mass crimes. We
also appreciate the efforts of the Special Advisers of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect.
My country has prioritized dialogue and the quest
for national consensus as a way of preventing and settling
disputes within our society. The same commitment to
18-20585

02/07/2018

dialogue is at the core of our foreign policy, and we
have spared no effort to peaceably resolve conflicts
with our neighbours and offer our good offices to settle
crises in sister countries. Gabon’s commitment to peace
and the protection of the civilian population is behind
its commitment to peacekeeping missions, for example
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
In that regard, I would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Blue Helmets and to peacekeeping
contingents throughout the world. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are a special instrument for
protecting civilians. We deplore the fact that they have
to be conducted in areas where, regrettably, there is no
peace to keep and where the lives of the Blue Helmets
can be at risk. I urge the United Nations to strengthen
the benefits of peacekeeping by providing missions
with the proper resources.
Gabon welcomes the fact that the Security Council
has placed the protection of civilian populations at the
core of the mandates of many peacekeeping missions,
as well as its focus on gender-based violence. We
support current efforts to better equip contingents at
the predeployment stage and during their missions to
ensure the protection of vulnerable groups, in particular
women and girls.
Above all the considerations and profound
differences affecting our world, our Assembly has the
responsibility to promote the effective implementation
of the responsibility to protect so as to better preserve
the human dignity that we share.
Ms. Uludong (Palau): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884). Let me also thank Australia and
Ghana for their leadership on this very important issue.

A/72/PV.105

fully embrace the right of all people to peaceful existence
and protection, in all matters, from hostile actions that
could jeopardize domestic peace or harmony.
We also believe in the positive effects of preventive
action. While it is fiscally beneficial to invest in
preventive action, such investment also saves lives.
Early dialogue and action can not only prevent loss of
life, they can generate healing from the traumas that
result from the atrocities of ethnic cleansing, war crimes
and other crimes against humanity. There is therefore a
significant place for expanding opportunities for civil
society. Working together at the international, regional
and domestic levels is imperative to ensure effective
and coordinated preventive action. Community efforts
and collaboration will help to identify and de-escalate
tensions that could spiral out of control. However, there
are also times when preventive action is not enough.
That is why, despite its minimal resources, in 2005
Palau contributed two women to its first peacekeeping
mission, in East Timor. In 2008, we sent one woman
to the peacekeeping mission in Darfur, in the Sudan.
Yes, I said “women”. In Palau, we believe that the right
to peace and prosperity and their related obligations
extends to all people, whatever their colour, creed,
race or gender. We will continue to contribute to
international peacekeeping forces as an absolute
obligation. That is why Palau has the highest per capita
induction rate into the United States military, which
also focuses its efforts on peacekeeping around the
world. That is why we participate fully and proactively
in United Nations initiatives on issues such as climate
change and biodiversity that work not only to save our
planet but also to protect the economic foundations that
peace and security are based on.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Kiribati on behalf of the Pacific Island
Forum (see A/72/PV.99).

Ultimately, the fight against atrocity crimes can
be won only through group effort. Shared experiences,
collaboration and coordination at all levels will help to
keep fellow Member States in check and will ultimately
ensure the safety of our citizens and global community.

Palau is a small island developing State with a
population of approximately 20,000. We gained full
independence only 25 years ago. Despite our size,
youth and limited role in international affairs, we have
nevertheless committed to fully participating in the
international forum and in confronting the issues of
the day. With a national Constitution that protects our
cultural heritage as well as the rights of our people, we

Every nation on the planet and their peoples
deserve peace, security, independence and prosperity.
But those rights come at a price. It is not without
obligations that we inhabit our place and time on the
Earth. In true empathy, Palau will therefore continue,
with all available means, to foster the rights of all the
people on the planet through active participation and
intervention in international initiatives that protect and

18-2058527/29

A/72/PV.105

02/07/2018

improve the plight of those least capable of securing a
better life for themselves.

support of the United Nations in that endeavour will
be instrumental.

Mr. Soomauroo (Mauritius): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly
for convening today’s meeting on the responsibility
to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, as part
of the formal agenda of its seventy-second session.

Mauritius is already a party to the Rome Statute,
which we have introduced into our domestic legislation
in our International Criminal Court Act, which
criminalizes genocide and other atrocities of war
crimes. Through our support for the International
Criminal Court, we foster capabilities for accountability
and reconciliation, and we also do so to ensure
accountability for atrocity prevention and actively
promote the universality of the Rome Statute.

The debate on the subject is long overdue. The
last time the Assembly had a formal discussion on this
very important issue was in 2009. We commend Ghana
and Australia for encouraging a substantive discussion
among Member States on the responsibility to protect.
Today’s debate reflects the importance we attach to
this crucial subject and the consensus that has been
built over the past decade regarding the importance of
preventing atrocities.
This dialogue is a good opportunity for us to
collectively reflect on the principle of the responsibility
to protect, identify gaps and strengthen the mechanism
for making the responsibility to protect more effective.
Time is short and human rights and humanitarian
situations in many of the world’s hotspots are worsening,
while insecurity continues to grow. No longer should
we look back to atrocious crimes and genocide with the
feeling that too little was done too late. Too often in the
past we have said “Never again”. Yet grave allegations
of mass atrocities in various parts of the world, if
not addressed in a timely and effective manner, may
quickly spiral into catastrophes, human and otherwise.
We all acknowledge that it is the core function
of States to protect their citizens. As noted in this
year’s annual report of the Secretary-General on
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884), the world simply must get better at
preventing and halting the most conscience-shocking
crimes. We welcome the focus on prevention, which is
about understanding the warning signs of an imminent
human catastrophe. It is important for all Member
States and the United Nations to take decisive action
to prevent and to protect people when clear signs exist.
On the African continent, the African Union and
other subregional organizations have been ahead of
the curve in establishing preventive mechanisms. They
should be supported in playing a more pronounced
role in preventing conflicts and sharpening their
early warning capabilities and their abilities. The
28/29

It is important that the international community
address the root causes of conflicts. In keeping
with our collective pledge under the Sustainable
Development Goals, which underscore that everyone
deserves a life of dignity, it is essential to promote
peaceful and inclusive societies, ensure justice for all
and build strong institutions for addressing conflicts.
For weak and vulnerable States, that can be achieved
only through technical assistance, capacity-building,
international partnerships and support.
The Acting President (spoke in French): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
I shall now call on those representatives who have
asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I would
like to remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first statement and five minutes for the second, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): My delegation is
obliged to take the floor to respond to the statement
by the representative of India during the 100th plenary
meeting of the Assembly, on 25 June, which was
nothing but a concocted mix of delusion and falsehood.
Contrary to India’s claim, Jammu and Kashmir never
were or will be part of India. According to Security
Council resolutions, they are a disputed territory. The
legal standing is firm and abiding. However much as
India may attempt, that fact can neither be sidestepped
nor wished away.
With regard to the human rights situation in
occupied Kashmir, I will venture no further than
the recent report by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
documents systematic violations of human rights in the
occupied territory. As the report notes, the situation is
exacerbated by parallel judicial structures, built with
18-20585

02/07/2018

the express purpose of “imped[ing] accountability and
jeopardiz[ing] the right to remedy for the victims of
human rights violations”.
As much as some may consider it so, repeating
groundless accusations and fabrications does not
lend them credibility. They may at best satisfy a selfdeluding notion of reality, but a farce can go only so far.
That is all too apparent from the report of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Mr. Bayyapu (India): During a previous meeting
in this important debate, a week ago (see A/72/PV.100),
we placed on record our objection to yet another attempt
by the delegation of Pakistan to misuse this forum. We
are constrained to take the floor again today. Repeated
and cynical attempts by Pakistan — a hub of terrorism
in our region and beyond — to spread a false narrative
about the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir have not

A/72/PV.105

succeeded in the past and will not do so now. We do not
wish to engage any further on the matter.
Mr. Warraich (Pakistan): Regrettably, we have
to request the floor again to respond to the statement
just made by the representative of India. We will not
lend credence to his statement by responding to it. We
will simply say that no amount of obfuscation by India
can alter the incontrovertible reality of the grim human
rights situation in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir
or the illegality of that occupation.
The Acting President (spoke in French): May
I take it that the Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of agenda item 132?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

18-2058529/29

