General Assembly Debate Statement: African Union
Unofficial Transcription from webcast

The role of the regional organizations has been addressed today in New York but it was also the
subject of debates in our region itself, many will remember the meeting that was held in 2008 in
Addis. That meeting focused specifically on the role of the AU regarding the R2P. The AU had
expressed at that time its vision of R2P through the President of the Commission, Jean Ping. He
was at the center of negotiations at 2005 when this matter became the focus of many discussions
in (inaudible). In the GA debate more specifically we are of the opinion that these exercises that
have come about in the region should end up being considered the architecture of this concept
and notion that we are looking at today.

In 2009 the debate was held on this that allowed us to evaluate to what point we had progressed.

It allowed us to evaluate the gaps that we had yet to fill in our work. I would like to underscore
that we are part of, or rather we believe in non-indifference. This is the case throughout our
history and (inaudible) move to the AU format and this is the case in cases of genocide in any
member state. This, given the genocide experienced in Rwanda. What is important is to look at
ways to endow a state with the possibility of protecting its own citizens. And the regional
organizations are directly exposed to the situations. How can these organizations work to protect
the countries of the region?
I’m not going to restate much of what has been said regarding how the African countries address
this with capacity building and with the strengthening the AU peace and security architecture.

Much of this includes the guidelines on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations.

Mr. President, we are not starting from scratch today I think we should also look at what we have
seen in 2005 when we negotiated this concept itself and that will help let us know where we are
today. Mr. President, you will remember as the delegation of Guinea has said that the
development of thinking in Africa on this concept of R2P and in particular with the protection of
our populations. This has greatly contributed to our negotiations in 2005. Many of you will
remember and I’m thinking and hoping that the Ambassador of Cameroon and others that were
following the process can support me on this but Mr. Jean Ping worked to convince the African
group that we must have we have to focus on this point R2P because the AU and its articles…
(CUT OFF).

I will conclude, I will address the history of this process because it is important to underscore
that since this argument has been used in many groups Africa knows what the situation is and we
have prepared the paragraph in the final outcome document to address the specific crimes. But I
entered the history of this to focus on one point: and here the observations made that the many

concerns that have been expressed and at the time as well and these concerns came from
delegations that were concerned that R2P would be used in an abusive manner.

Many have spoken today. At some point we have to stop and reflect on what has not worked and
why we have not moved beyond the 2005 concerns and I say this having heard from different
remarks today. In particular if we look at the 3rd pillar. That is to say that dialogue should have
manifested itself into more concrete steps. (Inaudible) focused on crises for instance crises in
North Africa. We can still see there are gaps to fill. Certain regional organizations and I’m not
just speaking about the African Union, have felt marginalized, for example in the Libyan crisis. I
think at some point we have to stop and look at what has not worked. Why have the concerns of
2005 and why have they not evolved to the point in 2011