SPEECH FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF CHILE, AMBASSADOR. OCTAVIO ERRÁZURIZ IN THE DEBATE
ON THE ROLE OF REGIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND SUB - REGIONAL IMPLEMENTATION IN THE
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, July 12, 2011
Thank you Mr. Chairman,
Chile appreciates the organizing this interactive debate, pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs
139 and 140 of the Final Document of the 2005 Summit
Mr. president,
The principle of the Responsibility to Protect gives states a framework to prevent any produce
of the four most serious crimes known to humanity: war crimes, crimes against humanity,
ethnic cleansing and genocide.

This time include the first two pillars of the responsibility to protect, on the one hand,
because it is the focus of today's debate and, secondly, because it is in those pillars which will take place the great
Most efforts to protect civilians.

In the first pillar, as a function of the state to protect its population, it is an obligation that must reach
more nuclear levels of society. Experience shows that the best way to do this is through
education, and also through a system of promotion and strengthening of human rights, a
universal access to justice, among others.

As for the second pillar, that is international cooperation to prevent any of the four crimes
above may occur in a particular country, Chile understood that this can only be given with due
consent of the State concerned. Cooperative action is unthinkable without such consent.

In this regard international cooperation, regional and subregional organizations have a leading role
order.

In the region, it has been the action that has taken UNASUR, whose timely action in 2008, at the request of a State
member, allowed heinous crimes be avoided.

Moreover, Inter-American level, include the Democratic Charter, which condemns the violent interruption
democratic life of the member countries of the OAS. Are these violent interruptions that great
Most often produce these four crimes.

Also, it notes the existence of the Commission and Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Access
any natural person or legal entity in the region believe that the judicial system in his country has broken its
obligation to impart justice.

The larger the network is created for the protection and promotion of human rights, have a
effective early warning system that allows to point out to the State itself, in the right way, the danger of
in a short time you can fall into any of the crimes that tries to avoid the Responsibility to Protect