General Assembly Debate Statement: Republic of Korea
Unofficial Transcription
http://www.unmultimedia.org/tv/webcast/2011/07/general-assembly-65th-session-english-2.html
02:39:00
The 2009 report of the UN Secretary General on the implementation of R2p have proved to important milestones for the
implementation and operationalization of R2P. Similarly last year’s interactive dialogue on the early warning assessment
reinforced the notion that preventing rather than just responding to mass atrocities should be prioritized for a variety of reasons.

In this regard my delegation appreciates the 2009 report of the Secretary General which focuses on the important role of regional
and sub-regional arrangements in implementing R2P. Overall the Secretary General’s third report this year constitutes another
significant building block for the implementation of R2P as it successfully elaborates the procedure, coordination and available
“SS” within and beyond the UN system for information gathering and analysis. Mr. President, the Republic of Korea as a
member of group of friends shares the view that in order to achieve prevention the role of regional organizations is absolutely
essential and no effort should be (inaudible) in the implementation of pillars 1 and 2. In addition as the SG accurately mentions in
his 2011 report the more progress that the state makes towards including these principles in (inaudible) policies practices
attitudes and institutions the less recourse will there be to the 3rd pillar. This must be our collective driving goal. My delegation
fully supports the Secretary General’s proposal for the theme of next year’s interactive dialogue, namely on assessment to date to
utilize all of the tools of chapters 6, 7, 8 in implementing pillar 3. My delegation is also encouraged by the joint office of the
prevention of genocide and the promotion R2P (inaudible) inherent with the overlaps of the organizations combating genocide
and its relatively new work in the field of R2P. Mr. President, lastly I would like to conclude my applauding of the Secretary
General and the two special advisers for working tirelessly to streamline the organization’s work on R2P and elevate this issue