Confederazione Svizzera Check against delivery

Confederaziun svizra

Swiss Confederation

 

65 ° Session, General Assembly

Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect

Interactive Dialogue on Responsibility to Protect
New York, July 12, 2011

Statement by Mr. Paul Seger, Permanent Representative

 

Mister President,

Switzerland welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on regional arrangements and rdle subrégio-
nal in for Implementation of the responsibility to protect. This joint report counselors
Special for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect to strengthen to
a joint approach and enable to lead to more systematic prevention strategies
ticks and early.

The report highlights how 4 the establishment of regional and subregional mechanisms is crucial
to support the United prevention efforts as well as to adapt and for applying and adapting strate-
gies developed a multilateral level. Switzerland shares this view, and we wish
three points:

1) The legitimacy of preventive action is a factor that is reinforced when these ac-
tions are in line with the social and cultural contexts of the regions.

2) The other benefit of the responsibility to protect addressed in a regional context is the 'access more
immediate information thus facilitating the rapid deployment of a series of local reactions.

This also reinforces the use of a multitude of civilian instruments - facilitation, mediation, good
offices and political dialogue ~ - has early stages.

3) The report also shows that the responsibility to protect is primarily a question of sover-
zenship responsible. However, in fragile or affected by conflict, the rule of law, secu-
side, good governance and socio-economic development should be strengthened to avoid
the back has a perverse cycle of violence. To this end, international actors should, too,
exercise their responsibility by improving the coordination and effectiveness of their efforts, in a spirit
partnership and mutual respect with national and regional actors.

Mister President,

 

Permanent Mission of Switzerland UN nearby
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations

633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
Tal. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.diae.admin.chimissny Basically convinced | the importance of the regional approach, Switzerland applies since
several years - in cooperation with Argentina and Tanzania, making regional forums
for the prevention of genocide and other atrocities. Three regional forums have already been held - respec-
tively 4 Buenos Aires, 4 Arusha and Bern - which has primarily allowed to work on these
issues with governments of these regions.

These forums have highlighted the diversity of existing good practice in these contextual
your, the importance of intra-regional relations and the ability of regional entities suggest
constructive strategies for prevention. A very good example is the Conference
International Great Lakes (CIGL), which applies to developing integrated prevention strategies
Graian in structures already existing. This process has great potential, but mostly i! we
recalls that a key to successful prevention ingredient is political will and a
local ownership. These forums have also shown that responsible sovereignty and pre-
prevention of mass atrocities are the result of an ongoing dialogue between multiple actors.

Through these regional forums, Switzerland has collected a number of lessons that we
would like to share with you;

"First, the fight against I'impunité is an inseparable ally of prevention. for REN-
force the preventive impact of international justice, we must develop all instrument
ments in the fight against limpunité a more systematic manner. Réecemment, the com-
national community has made such use of survey commissions and settlement
facts repeatedly. It is important that, from the beginning, mandates such com-
Assignments are formulated in unequivocal manner, that the mode of operation is well
congu and, if so, the nature of their relations with the judicial authorities, such
The International Criminal Court is clear.

* Second, the best prevention resulting from a responsible sovereignty comes
respect and active promotion of human rights. The integration of indicators related to the
prevention of atrocities in the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of the Human Rights Council
4 man would our senses to better detect situations at risk and could be the
sign of a very concrete commitment in this area.

¢ Thirdly, the need - in the context of this overall architecture pre-
prevention - of national focal points for the prevention of atrocities was also noted
during the regional meetings. These focal points should contribute to strengthening ties in-
be the levels of national response, regional and international. |! is more important than
focal points enjoy adequate legitimacy, and have a convening capacity,
coordination and communication. Only by ensuring a reconciliation
early detection measures and decision-making that we can better prevent atrocious
Cities and contribute to avoid resorting to drastic means such as the use of Ia strength.

Mister President,

Convinced of the importance of such an instrument, Switzerland has decided to create a focal point in the
head of a task force involving the competent offices in diplomacy, international law
public and development cooperation. The combination of the two terms of prevention and
fight against impunity is a message in itself and we are convinced that the fight against
effective limpunité can contribute to the prevention of atrocities.

Mission permanente de la Suisse auprés des Nations Unies
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations

633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
Tél. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.ch/missny Unofficial transtation

Mr President,

Switzerland welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the role of regional and subregional
arrangements in implementing the responsibility to protect. The aim of this joint report drafted by the
special advisors on the prevention of genocide and on the responsibility to protect, is to consolidate a
common approach and to enable the formulation of more systematic and timely prevention strategies.

The report stresses to what extend the creation of regional and sub-regional mechanisms is crucial in
supporting prevention efforts undertaken by the States, as well as in adapting and implementing multi-
lateral strategies. Switzerland shares this view, and we would like to highlight three points.

1) Legitimacy is a decisive factor for preventive action. It is strengthened further when such action is in
line with the prevailing social and cultural contexts of the affected regions.

2) Regional implementation of the responsibility to protect has the additional advantage of providing
direct access to information, facilitating therefore a swift deployment of proximity responses. It also
enhances the early use of a multitude of civilian instruments, including facilitation, mediation, good
offices and political dialogue.

3) Finally, the report shows that the responsibility to protect is first and foremost a matter of responsi-
ble sovereignty. In the context of fragile states and countries affected by conflict, however, security,
the rule of law, good governance and socio-economic development must be strengthened in order to
forestall a return to a pernicious cycle of violence. It likewise falls to international stakeholders to act
responsibly by improving the coordination and effectiveness of their efforts, in a spirit of partnership
and mutual respect with national and regional stakeholders.

Mr. President,

Switzerland firmly believes in the importance of the regional approach, a position that is reflected in its
commitment of many years, in cooperation with Argentina and Tanzania, to organizing regional forums
on the prevention of genocide and other atrocities. The three regional forums that have already taken
place - in Buenos Aires, Arusha and Berne, respectively — provided an opportunity to address these
issues with the governments of the regions concerned.

These fora have highlighted the variety of best practices that currently exist in a wide range of con-
texts, the importance of intra-regional relations, and the ability of regional-entities to devise construc-
tive prevention strategies. An excellent example is the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (CIRGL), which is committed to developing prevention strategies that can subsequently be
incorporated into existing structures. This process holds great promise and, in particular, reminds us
that two of the key factors behind the success of preventive action are political will and local owner-
ship. These fora also showed that responsible sovereignty and the prevention of mass atrocities are
the result of permanent dialogue between numerous stakeholders.

Switzerland learned several lessons from these regional fora, which we would like to share with you.

«First, the fight against impunity goes hand in hand with prevention. If the preventive impact of
international justice is to be strengthened, a set of instruments must be developed that enable
impunity to be combated more systematically. Recently, the international community has for
example repeatedly used investigation committees and fact-finding commissions. It is impor-

 

Mission permanente de la Suisse auprés des Nations Unies
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations

633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
‘Tél, +1212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.ch/missny tant from the outset that the mandates of such commissions are formulated in unambiguous
terms, that their procedures are well designed and that the nature of any links they may have
to judicial bodies, such as the International Criminal Court, is clearly defined.

« Second, the respect and active promotion of human rights is the aspect of responsible sove-
reignty that has the best preventive effect. We believe that the inclusion of prevention-related
indicators in the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of the Human Rights Council would improve
the detection of high-risk situations and would send a clear message of strong commitment to
prevention.

¢ Third, and finally, these regional meetings also identified the need to designate national focal
points for atrocity prevention within the global prevention architecture, which would help
strengthen links between the national, regional and international levels of intervention. It is al-
so important that these focal points are afforded sufficient legitimacy and are equipped with
the power to convene, coordinate and communicate. It is only by narrowing the gap between
early detection efforts and the decision-making process, that atrocities will be best prevented
which in turn will contribute to avoid the need of resorting to drastic measures, such as the use
of force.

Mr. President,

Convinced of the usefulness of such an instrument, Switzerland plans to establish its own national
focal point. It will head up a task force that brings together the competent offices on matters of diplo-
macy, public international law and development cooperation. The combination of both mandates of
prevention and of fighting impunity is a message in itself, and we firmly believe that an effective fight
against impunity can contribute to prevent atrocities.

Permanent Mission of Switzerland UN nearby
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations

633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6708
Phone. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.chimissny