ARGENTINA
STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATION IN ARGENTINA
OPEN DEBATE ON GENERAL ASSEMBLY
TOPIC RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECTNew York, August 9, 2010
Check for reading
Argentina intervention delegation to the General Assembly open debate on
Responsibility to Protect. August 9, 2010Mr. president,
My delegation welcomes the convening of this debate, which we consider very effective in
Agenda of the United Nations, and also appropriate, since the issue were in
this Assembly on 28 July 2009. As expressed at that time, the Assembly
General is adequate space for consideration of relevant aspects to
implementation of the responsibility to protectA the same as in July 2009, I wish to underline the interest and commitment of Argentina
with this topic. My country assigns a preeminent place in the defense of rights
human, and hence its firm commitment to work at the multilateral level and at the regional
prevent and remedy situations of serious violations -which are usually
sistemáticas-- massive human rights.

Argentina is committed to international criminal justice when one of
these four crimes is committed, and for this, it is imperative to consider the role of
International Criminal Court, since we are in an era when the ad hoc tribunals
They are giving way to a permanent system of international criminal justice focused on
Cut. However, it is essential to the prevention of genocide, war crimes, the
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanityThe Final Document of the 2005 Summit, which includes the commitment of the Heads of
States and Government's responsibility to protect, merely
capture a synthesis of other international obligations that full
contributes to the prevention of the commission of four crimes to which we are
referring.

In preventing these four crimes to respect the Responsibility to Protect
Three aspects are essential:
a) The first is the need for respect for human rights, and compliance
the obligations arising from the right of refugees and, in particular, the
International human right. Humanitarian law is a set
essential rules make protection of civilians in situations
-both internal armed conflict internacional--, and proper protection
It carries civilians becoming victims of the four crimes. My country can not
overemphasize, then, the role of international humanitarian law founded
in the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977. These, and
Human rights standards are fundamental obligations of States,
in whom resides primarily responsible for protecting.

b) The second is the element to which the report of the Secretary-General refers
A / 65/678, which much agradecemos--, ie, early warning and assessmentReport of the Secretary-General notes that evaluations of Nations
United on the genocide in Rwanda and the fall of Srebrenica were far from
necessary to prevent what happened. The lesson from these cases is then,
that information, assessment and early warning are essential for
multilateral and regional efforts to prevent the commission of genocideI would like, in this regard, recognizing the work of the Special Adviser on
Genocide Unit Conflict Prevention UNDP, of the
Operations Department of Peacekeeping, UNICEF -in
coordination with the DPKO--, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees.

They provide valuable information that can be used for prevention
of the four crimes, although, as the report highlights the Secretary
Generally, there are three gaps in the ability of the United Nations
provide timely information and assessment required for the
responsibility to protect can be exercised in a way balanced
yet decisiveTo fill these gaps, it is essential that the action of the United Nations is
complemented by regional or subregional efforts. The nations
United Nations and regional organizations should be partners in the effort to anticipate the
possibility of the occurrence of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, in order to prevent their occurrence.

c) The third element, Mr. President, is the continuity of the commitment
international, through the General Assembly on the subject. At its 63rd meeting, this
Assembly adopted its first resolution on the subject (63/308 resolution)As he pointed out by the report of the Secretary-General, political dialogue between the
Members should continue on this emerging concept in the right
international, in particular, on how best to implement it. In the respect, and given
the importance of the regional element, my country is open to the suggestion of the
Secretary General to hold an interactive dialogue, in August 2011 on
the role of regional and subregional organizations in this topic.

Mr. president,
The responsibility to protect is an essential obligation of States, since no
does more than combine all its international obligations to protect the person
human. However, when they fail, the United Nations can not remain
others, and s action can prevent the commission of these grave crimes. The implementation
Responsibility to Protect requires careful and detailed discussion and Assembly
General is adequate space for that process. Argentina is convinced that,
such as mandated in paragraph 139 of the Final Document of the World Summit
2005, the General Assembly should continue to examine the issue, in order to make
Implementing the responsibility to protect