f

0) 4

C Cut 7)

General Assembly Informal Thematic Debate on responseap; protect him -
Yaodt 2010

ae
Nedevs; I, 5 fault f
Mr. President al soft Guba Tete a bin -
I votierais saluef holding this Gis informal debate in the straight line
Paragraph 139 of the final document of the 2004 Summit mondiaf] calling Assembly
A snérale eamtins var Ot dum ae '
General to continue ™ @ -censidéred responsibility Ae protect popul ation of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing crimes against etfes Phumaan
i
Shak; - bi
~> Vobjectif prevention is one of the three pillars of the responsibility to protect, Anse-ttre, Sune
salugns''initiative MNS President of the General Assembly debate focaliseer informed!
On early warning and | evaluation, following the Secretary General's report on this theme.

This report is an important step in identifying existing and capa cities
shortcomings of the UN system in the matiéri \ [Eela allow the implementation process

are gaps, while relying on resources and

 

   

 

 

ETDE same structures 4 of pall
experiences we have.

(Like 'e says the report, information on the mass atrocities abound
within the UN system, the problem is the absence of a relevant and systtme
effective management and sharing of information, which enables to € butcher on
concrete actions.

~ Da ~ aA Vein dele
oles improvements in early warning and assessment in particular has doivenUntervenir

two levels:

-First, in analytical assessment process, the Secretariat should
develop an analytical framework and clarify the criteria used for the collection of
information and assessment, way to ensure that a situation is analyzed in a
Perspective responsibility to protect and genocide prevention. This manner of
to ensure that Member States existing information in the UN system:
are properly analyzed in providing a guarantee of predictability and transparency.

This would strengthen the legitimacy of the assessment process and the legitimacy alerts
Early initiated under the aegis of the concept of responsibility of protege.

- Then institutional centralization of information that field processes,

Traffic assessments Secretariat and transmission to the Security Council and
"Shareholders should be set in clear and predictable manner. In this sense,

INO arrangements and stains from 2 Special advisers for the prevention of genocide and
responsibility to protect described in the report of the Secretary-General paragraphs
17 and 18 are welcome, including the principle of establishing a Joint Office. It's about
establish clear responsibilities for early warning and assessment tasks in
responsibility to protect and prevent genocide, and to gather in case of
crisis assessments relevant specialized agencies. The Secretary General might
Then, following an urgent meeting of the Under Secretaries General, present options
concrete action to the Security Council or of the general meeting.

Yd

¥
'\. The establishment of fact-finding missions, quick manner fielded,

can be an early warning and assessment tool that deserves to be déyeloppé. At-
beyond the benefits that such missions bring to the roomate plan
particular circumstances, they have an aspect of preventive diplomacy that can contribute
reduce tension and sometimes prevent a seizure. These missions, involving members
the region concerned, may also contribute to strengthen the concept of I'universalité
Responsibility to Protect.

ula, Nobis saludns construed attention to regional and local actors in the report of
Secretary-General on early warning, assessment and the responsibility to protect. The
local sources and perspectives of regional players are essential for a system
fast and effective evaluation alert.

taberle) Leyra Nartsle Uo Higby ade Ge eat 1

Pasta has been for years a network of experts and experiences

early warning in genocide prevention material that could find
applications as part of the responsibility to protect. Working with Argentina
and Tanzania, Switzerland and organized regional forums on prevention
genocide, which have yielded recommendations referred to regional and
Multilateral and we would be happy to share with the Secretariat and delegations
interested. |