
I am taking the floor to
deliver an explanation of vote before the voting on
the draft resolution that has just been introduced
(A/73/L.94).
My delegation is deeply disappointed with the draft
resolution submitted for action today. Singapore does
not condone torture. However, the draft resolution is
fundamentally flawed, both in terms of substance and
process. In terms of substance, the draft resolution is
asking the General Assembly to legislate and regulate
matters of international trade. From the outset, my
delegation expressed strong concern that the draft
resolution is forcing international trade issues to be
decided by the General Assembly when it is not the
appropriate body to do so.
In terms of process, the sponsors have shown no
interest in engaging delegations with different views.
There were absolutely no probatory discussions on
this issue. Only three informal consultations were
held, during which many delegations questioned
why the sponsors were so eager to push through the

draft resolution in such a short time frame, without
producing any data on the actual volumes of trade in
the categories of goods in question. It was very clear
that the sponsors were neither interested nor committed
to engaging delegations with different views.
I will now outline my delegation’s specific concerns
with the draft resolution.
First, the draft resolution seeks to establish new
conditionalities on international trade that could be
used to justify protectionism. Ultimately, these new
conditionalities will impede the flow of international
trade and undermine the rules-based multilateral
trading system. What is most disappointing is that the
sponsors of the draft resolution have always claimed
to be advocates of an open rules-based and transparent
multilateral trading system, which is also ironic, as this
comes at a time when the sponsors have been making
strong calls against protectionism. May I also say that
we were neither reassured not convinced by the points
just made in this regard by the main sponsor during the
introduction of the draft resolution.
As a small and open country that is deeply committed
to the rules-based multilateral trading system and whose
life blood is international trade, Singapore is firmly
of the view that it is inappropriate that the General
Assembly adopt draft resolution A/73/L.94. At a time
when unilateralism is on the rise and protectionism
is rearing its ugly head, the international community
should not introduce additional restrictions that would
shake the core of a predictable, open and rules-based
multilateral trading system. Further, we are deeply
concerned that the draft resolution would provide cover
for deliberate and/or disguised restrictions on free
and open trade between countries. Unfortunately, the
sponsors have not addressed these concerns seriously
and substantively.
The introduction of a new seventh preambular
does not address the fundamental flaw of the draft
resolution. What is most dangerous about the draft
is that it establishes a precedent for the future and
emboldens others to introduce other draft resolutions
that seek to legislate and regulate trade issues based on
controversial criteria or requirements.
Our second concern is that the draft resolution
mandates the Secretary-General to establish a group of
governmental experts to draft parameters for a range
of options to establish common international standards
for the import, export and transfer of goods used for

capital punishment and torture. That mandate is based
on the unfounded premise cited in the sixth preambular
paragraph, without any evidence whatsoever having
been provided, that there is “growing support across all
regions for concluding an international instrument” to
establish such common international standards.
My delegation is of the firm view that the General
Assembly should not rush into creating such a group
of governmental experts before Member States have
had sufficient time to have a more in-depth dialogue
on this issue. The assertions by the co-sponsors during
the informal consultations that the Secretary-General’s
report and the group of governmental experts are in
themselves discussions on the issue are simply not
credible. The fact is that the group of governmental
experts will comprise a closed group of select
individuals who cannot possibly represent the range of
views of 193 Member States. Why are the co-sponsors
reluctant to establish an open-ended working group to
discuss this issue further? Are they afraid of listening
to different views? Imposing common international
standards through a selective and closed process is not
the right way to establish such standards.
Last but not least, the draft resolution conflates
capital punishment with torture — a linkage that is
not supported by international law. In so doing, the
co-sponsors are attempting to impose the unfounded
view that capital punishment is a form of torture when
there is no international consensus in that regard. By
linking the two separate concepts in the draft resolution
and refusing to take on board the legitimate concerns
of many delegations regarding such a linkage, the
members of the Alliance for Torture-Free Trade have
shown that they are interested only in advancing their
own narrow agenda and ideological objectives and in
forcing the General Assembly to endorse their views
through a cynical numbers game.
Singapore will vote against the draft resolution for
all the reasons that I have set out. I would call on other
delegations to do the same.