
(spoke in French):
We thank the President of the General Assembly for
organizing this debate on a most important item
on the agenda of the seventy-third session, namely,
the responsibility to protect and the prevention of

genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
Togo takes note of report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/898) in this debate, entitled “Responsibility
to protect: lessons learned for prevention”. As the
Secretary-General quite rightly highlights in the report,
at the 2005 World Summit, Member States agreed
that it was incumbent upon every State to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. Progress has certainly
been made since then in terms of conceptualizing and
implementing the responsibility to protect. However,
in the face of a worrisome decline in international
commitment to multilateralism, it remains imperative
to continue advancing the implementation of the
responsibility to protect.
In his report, the Secretary-General also invites
Member States to focus their efforts on diversity, which
they must manage as a force in order to strengthen
the principle of accountability and the rule of law
and to improve access to sustainable livelihoods. For
its part, the Government of Togo adopted a national
development plan for the period 2018 to 2022, thereby
making a significant investment in human capital. It
will ensure that the people of Togo are put first, both
in terms of having their say and benefiting from the
country’s development. This ambitious plan, which
is being implemented as we speak, places special
emphasis on vocational training in order to improve
economic productivity, accelerate youth employment
and reduce social inequalities.
Social protection is also key in order to gradually
broaden inclusion to reach all segments of the
population and bolster the contribution of the social
sector to wealth creation. There are also ongoing efforts
to improve the quality of, and access to, basic social
services, including education, health care, nutrition,
energy services, water and sanitation. The lessons
learned from Togolese history have allowed our highest
authorities to identify the priority areas in which the
State must focus on capacity-building, so as to fulfil its
responsibility to protect the people of Togo.
Over the past year, Togo has made tremendous
efforts to improve security, thanks to numerous
reforms and actions undertaken in this sphere, in
particular strengthening the capacities of our defence
and security forces, the fight against the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons and the establishment

of a digital border control system. Civil protection is
also a priority for my Government. Therefore, in 2017,
Togo established a national civil protection agency and
four emergency fire rescue units, in Lomé and other
regional cities.
With regard to justice, the Government is concerned
with ensuring that the Togolese justice system is fair,
efficient, independent and accessible to all. Bearing that
in mind, we have developed initiatives to support the
modernization project for the justice system, improve
judges’ working conditions and bring justice closer to
the people.
Human rights are a matter of particular importance
for my country’s authorities. Therefore, among the key
reforms undertaken to promote and protect civil and
political rights, as well as the economic, social and
cultural rights of citizens, include Togo’s ratification of
almost all the relevant treaties and instruments. I refer
in particular to the establishment of the Truth, Justice
and Reconciliation Commission of Togo in 2009,
which was tasked with providing recommendations
to the Government on appropriate punishment for the
perpetrators of the violations committed throughout the
country’s history, as well as measures to be taken to
prevent such acts of violence reoccurring.
In 2016, a vote was taken to establish a law on the
organization and functions of a national human rights
commission, which now acts as a mechanism to prevent
and combat torture. The same year also saw a vote
on a law on the status of refugees in Togo in order to
bridge any gaps in the evolution of refugee-protection
norms, which established an appeals mechanism and
provided for measures to be taken in case of a mass
arrival of asylum seekers on national territory. We
also created the Office of the High Commissioner for
Reconciliation and Strengthening of National Unity,
appointed a national mediator and reformed our armed
forces, police and intelligence services.
Although it faces many constraints and challenges
in implementing its responsibility to protect, Togo will
continue its efforts in the priority areas I mentioned,
as well as many others. I wish to take this opportunity
to acknowledge and commend the valuable support
Togo has received to this end from all of its bilateral
and multilateral partners, including the United
Nations system.
In conclusion, Togo remains convinced of
the importance of promoting a more coherent and

comprehensive approach to the responsibility to
protect in all of the Organization’s intergovernmental
bodies. Although the General Assembly remains the
main forum for dialogue on this important subject, the
involvement of the Security Council remains crucial
in view of the fundamental role it plays in resolving
issues related to peace and security. Accordingly, the
Human Rights Council should also play its part by
placing greater emphasis on the prevention of criminal
atrocities within the overall context of the prevention of
human rights violations.