
The
United States is pleased to participate in this debate on
the responsibility to protect (R2P).
We continue to support the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document and believe that each individual
State has the responsibility to protect its populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. We applaud the work of
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
Ms. Karen Smith, and encourage the General Assembly
to consider making this debate an annual agenda
item. We recommend that the Secretary-General more
closely examine the impact of human rights violations

and abuses, including sexual violence, as key earlywarning indicators in his 2020 report.
The United States recognizes that there are vital
interests in protecting populations from mass atrocities.
Our December 2017 national security strategy
highlighted the importance of holding perpetrators
of genocide and mass atrocities accountable. On
14 January, the Elie Wiesel Genocide and Atrocities
Prevention Act came into law, reaffirming the United
States commitment to preventing and responding to
atrocities. That legislation highlights the importance of
a coordinated, whole-of-Government approach in order
to strengthen our Governments ability to forecast,
prevent and respond to mass atrocities.
In support of early warning and prevention, the
Department of State conducts regular analysis of global
atrocity risks and a deeper analysis focused on highrisk countries that are susceptible to atrocities. In order
to address atrocity risks, the United States Government
identifies gaps in existing diplomatic and programmatic
activities and formulates recommendations and policy
options. The United States is engaged in preventative
work, too. In early June, we unveiled the United
States strategy on women and peace and security,
a Government-wide framework that articulates the
United States commitment to promoting the meaningful
participation of women in efforts to respond to
conflict. Through women’s meaningful participation in
mediation efforts and preventative work, we can avert
atrocities before they happen.
The United States continues to play an active role
in the Global Network of R2P Focal Points and was
pleased to participate in recent meetings in Brussels.
We continue to support best practices in the prevention
space. The United States has also been a strong
supporter of the Human Rights Up Front initiative since
its inception. The initiative is a valuable convening
mechanism to ensure a whole-of-United Nations
approach to prevention with regard to human rights
abuses and violations. Given that human rights abuses
and violations are often an early-warning indicator of
mass atrocities, we encourage Member States to engage
further in the work of the Third Committee. Member
States can deliver statements on the Third Committee’s
agenda items during interactive dialogues with the
special rapporteurs, such as the Special Rapporteur for
freedom of expression and the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights defenders.

The United States Government supports a range of
efforts that both directly and indirectly reduce the risks
of mass atrocities. Such efforts include establishing
and training local communities to use early-warning
systems, supporting criminal justice system reform
and documenting human rights abuses for justice and
accountability processes. In one example, we surveyed
and documented human rights violations and abuses
against the Rohingya in 2017, in a time sensitive and
comprehensive manner. The data collected is bolstering
current efforts to pursue accountability for those
responsible for atrocities and to contribute to justice for
the victims.
We commend the Secretary-General’s efforts to
better coordinate within the United Nations system to
prevent atrocities, and we are pleased to support this
formal debate. Moving forward, we will continue to
look for opportunities to integrate prevention efforts
across the United Nations system.