
On behalf of
Afghanistan and all the other sponsors, under sub-item
(b) of agenda item 74, I am pleased to introduce for
action by the General Assembly the draft resolution
entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation to
assist victims of terrorism”.
Allow me to convey our sincere gratitude to all
Member States for the constructive engagement that
characterized the negotiations on the draft resolution
during the informal consultations. The highly engaged
participation by Member States during the consultations
and the quality of the debates in a cooperative atmosphere
are a testimony to the importance of this issue.
Terrorism and violent extremism continue to
undermine our shared values of peace, security, human
rights for all and the rule of law. These evil phenomena
are also direct threats to our sustainable growth
and development.
Despite all of our efforts, the toll of terrorism is on
the rise. Countless people around the world have been
killed, suffered injuries, lost loved ones, or witnessed
the destruction of their properties and livelihoods. Most
of the time, victims of terrorism are forgotten shortly
after the incident, left to address their trauma and pick
up the shattered pieces of their lives by themselves.
We believe that victims of terrorism deserve more
international attention — their voices must be heard,
their rights protected and their needs addressed. The
current draft resolution was conceived to address
that reality.
The draft resolution aims to further strengthen
national and international mechanisms to support
victims of terrorism and their families and to ensure that
their human rights and fundamental freedoms are fully

respected. The text condemns all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
It expresses the unwavering commitment of the
international community to strengthen cooperation to
prevent and combat terrorism, address impunity and
pursue accountability for the perpetrators of terrorist
acts and their supporters.
Furthermore, the draft resolution calls upon Member
States to develop their comprehensive assistance plans
for victims of terrorism in order to address the needs of
victims of terrorism and their families, and requests the
relevant United Nations entities to assist Member States
in developing such plans and aid in their capacitybuilding.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report containing an evaluation
of the existing United Nations activities on victims of
terrorism, with a focus on concrete recommendations
for a voluntarily funded comprehensive programme
to support Member States in assisting the victims of
terrorism through national mechanisms.
In conclusion, by adopting this draft resolution
today, this organ will demonstrate its unwavering
commitment to, and solidarity with, victims of terrorism
and their survivors. It is my sincere hope that the
General Assembly will adopt it by consensus. I would
like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude to
all Member States that have supported and sponsored
the draft resolution. I also invite those who have not yet
sponsored it to support this important initiative.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.88.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.