
(spoke in Spanish):
I appreciate the convening of this plenary meeting
on an issue of great importance that requires serious
and thorough analysis by the General Assembly. I
would also like to convey my gratitude, through the
President, to the Secretary-General for his report on the
responsibility to protect (А/73/898), which focuses on
lessons learned for prevention.
The State of Ecuador believes that the responsibility
to protect is an issue that cannot be taken lightly.
Although the concept has a humanitarian basis, it is
also true that it must be implemented based on premises
that do not undermine the guarantees and sovereignty
of States
Ecuador supported the adoption of resolution
60/1 in 2005, which endorsed by consensus the 2005
World Summit Outcome document, which clearly
established the pillars that should underpin the idea of
the responsibility to protect. Pillar I identifies the State
as the entity with the primary role of protecting its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. Pillar II emphasizes
the role to be played by the international community
through cooperation and the provision of assistance in
order to enable States to build local capacity that will
enable them to meet their responsibilities. And pillar III
enables the international community to take collective
measures, in accordance with the norms and procedures
established in the Charter of the United Nations — that
is, through the Security Council — in accordance with
Chapters VI and VII of the Charter.
The Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador sets
out, as a fundamental principle of coexistence, the
need to guarantee full respect for human rights and
the obligation of States to fight for their realization.
We therefore believe that pillars I, II and III should be
implemented in strict accord with national policy and in
chronological sequence, with priority always accorded
to the pillars I and II, on the understanding that pillar
III, and any eventual use of force, should come into play
only in exceptional circumstances and as a last resort.
Ecuador has adopted mechanisms to prevent
atrocity crimes. In doing so it included in its 2008
Constitution and national legislation no statute of
limitation for prosecuting and penalizing crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, forced
disappearance of persons and crimes of aggression. In
our country none of those cases is eligible for amnesty.

With the same commitment, the Government of Ecuador
signed the code of conduct for the Security Council to
respond in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes.
Moreover, we agree with the Secretary-General that
the responsibility to protect is a universal principle. That
is why we have supported every regional and subregional
initiative that would encourage Governments to
assume their responsibilities emanating from relevant
international treaties and to identify and address points
of friction in their societies before they lead to violent
situations or atrocities.
We take note of the balance struck in the report on
the importance of examining the practices I mentioned,
the lessons of which aim to strengthen preventive
measures and initiatives, including the role played by
States and the international community in that regard.
We reiterate that only the General Assembly has the
legal capacity and authority to define the responsibility
to protect and, more specifically, to identify the
conceptual, institutional and political dimensions of the
task of its implementation. The responsibility to protect
is a concept that requires further analysis and discussion
among the States Members of the Organization. That
is why last year Ecuador voted in favour of including
this topic on the agenda of the General Assembly at this
session, with a view to constructively, in a transparent
manner and without politicizing the dialogue make
progress towards an agreement that will, as an ultimate
goal, guarantee the protection of civilians in all places
where atrocity crimes are committed.
Ecuador emphasizes that the prevention of conflicts
through the peaceful settlement of disputes is the best
way to prevent the commission of atrocity crimes. The
best way to prevent conflicts and the most expeditious
way to strengthen national capacities lies in building
trust — trust in both the law and international public
law, as well as in the application, respectability
and accountability of the institutions established to
implement it.
With regard to accountability, we want to highlight
the role played by the International Criminal Court in
the maintenance of international peace and justice, in
safeguarding the rule of law and as an essential element
in conflict prevention and the provision of reparations
to the victims of the most serious crimes. We also
believe that the numerous initiatives and commitments
generated by this forum, such as the recent United

Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech and
the fight against violence and sexual violence, and the
search for the root causes of conflicts should be joined
together as important mechanisms to complement the
responsibility to protect.
Lastly, we reiterate our confidence in the role played
by regional and subregional organizations in preventing
conflicts and the commission of atrocity crimes. We
attach high value to early-warning mechanisms to avoid
the deterioration of the situation of a country and avert
the outbreak of crises and violence against the civilian
population, the most vulnerable of whom are generally
the most affected.