
(spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like
to express its deep thanks and appreciation to the
representatives of the permanent delegation of the
friendly Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the
transparent and balanced process they carried out
successfully and in a professional manner, which led to
today’s draft resolution A/73/L.88.
My country, Syria, will join the consensus on the
draft resolution. We participated in the negotiations
and consultations in a most positive and constructive

spirit. We wanted a draft resolution that, as much
as possible, would achieve the noble objectives of
promoting international cooperation to assist the
victims of terrorism.
However, the path to achieving such important
objectives is often routinely blocked by obstacles
resulting from political considerations that are related
to the interests of States or regional and geographic
groups. In that regard, my delegation would like to
explain its firm position with regard to the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
We shall continue to call for the reform of the
Centre’s system and its working methods in order
to ensure the implementation of the principles of
transparency, participation and governance. At the
same time, the Syrian Arab Republic will continue
to disassociate itself from the activities of the Centre
because we believe that it works in a way that runs
counter to the United Nations principles of transparency,
neutrality and inclusiveness.
With regard to the substance of the draft resolution,
as a country that is primarily concerned with combating
terrorism, the Syrian Arab Republic welcomes any
references to protecting the rights of the victims of
crimes perpetrated by armed terrorist groups, which
primarily target civilians, leading to the killing of
thousands and the injury of thousands more on pretexts
that have no basis in fact or reality. Such acts also target
public and private property and infrastructure, leading
to the displacement of millions and threatening the
stability of States and societies, as well as the security
of their citizens.
In parallel, my delegation stresses that the
prosecution and ensuring of accountability for the
perpetrators of terrorist acts and crimes must take
place within a national framework that respects
national ownership and characteristics, as well as the
laws and Constitutions of States, through national
legal institutions.
The Syrian Arab Republic therefore welcomes the
reference in the draft resolution in that respect. We also
stress that sharing information and expertise among
Member States must be based on the principle of mutual
respect for national sovereignty and that providing
United Nations technical assistance to Member States
must be based on requests from the Governments
of States.

In its war against terrorism against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and
other terrorist groups, the Syrian Arab Republic has lost
tens of thousands of its sons and daughters. The Syrian
people have experienced unprecedented suffering
because of terrorism, in addition to terrible economic
losses that no State in the world can bear alone.
However, to date my country has received no
technical or concrete financial support from the United
Nations in combating terrorism. In fact, it is subject
to an unprecedented economic siege, imposed by the
Governments of States that have either participated in
financing that terrorism or have turned a blind eye to it
and its supporters and financers.
We still believe that there are many international
responsibilities towards the victims of terrorism in
Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and any other parts of
the world that face terrorism. Those responsibilities
should be borne by Member States and the United
Nations in a collective manner. They are fundamentally
linked to the need to implement the relevant Security
Council counter-terrorism resolutions so as to
eradicate terrorism as a very dangerous international
phenomenon that threatens international peace and
security and leads to countless victims. We now bear
the responsibility for compensating and rehabilitating
those victims.
Let me say very frankly that we are here today to
deal with the consequences of terrorist acts because
some Governments did not commit to combating
terrorism in a non-politicized way without double
standards — States that did not respect the Security
Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII, which
prohibit and criminalize the financing and arming
of supporters of armed terrorist groups. They have
breached those resolutions and have participated
directly in the spread of the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Let me conclude by stressing that my country, Syria,
joins the consensus on the draft resolution and supports
all international efforts that respect the national
sovereignty of States, since national Governments are
the true partner in combating terrorism and in protecting
the rights of victims of terrorism. However, we will
always emphasize that we owe the victims of terrorism
everywhere on Earth a large debt and that the protection
of the rights of victims of terrorism starts with dealing

with the real root causes and grounds that led to the
spread of terrorism as an international phenomenon.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.88, entitled “Enhancement of
international cooperation to assist victims of terrorism”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.88, and in addition to those delegations
listed therein, the following countries have become
co-sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom, the United States
of America, Uzbekistan and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take I that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.88?
Draft resolution A/73/L.88
(resolution 73/305).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.