
(spoke
in Russian): We welcome the General Assembly’s
decision to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the convening of the International Conference
on Population and Development. We consider the
Programme of Action adopted at the Conference to be
a fundamental document for international cooperation
in population and development that should not be
amended or edited. We are of the view that the work of
the bodies and agencies of the United Nations system in
this area should be based on the basic principles of the
Programme of Action that were agreed on 25 years ago,
and not on their arbitrary interpretation.
In that context, our delegation supported resolution
73/303, which was just adopted, in order to strengthen
the principle of consensus, although not all the
resolution’s provisions fully take our approaches into
account. We are guided by the fact that the text that
was adopted does not set a precedent for the holding
of such events with respect to the participation of
non-governmental organizations in the meeting. We
also expect that all States will have the opportunity to
speak in the upcoming meeting, if they are interested in
doing so, and that their statements will be given priority.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/73/L.94)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.94.
(spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to take this
opportunity to thank the delegation of Afghanistan
for its initiative to prepare resolution 73/305, entitled

“Enhancement of international cooperation to assist
victims of terrorism”.

appropriate system of assistance and protection that
meets their genuine needs.

We are pleased to note that the result of such efforts
was a consensus document that will be an important
addition to the broad range of measures to combat
terrorism under the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We would like to stress in particular
the importance of the resolution’s provisions concerning
access for victims to the justice system and respect for
their rights in legal cases, as well as the paragraphs
pertaining to the improvement of criminal measures
to punish terrorists and to cooperation between the
relevant entities tasked with that role.

The Group of Friends of the Victims of Terrorism
was formed just this week. We, along with Afghanistan,
will chair the Group. We hope to be able to work to
promote the agenda of the victims of terrorism here
at the United Nations. Furthermore, Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov recently announced a
global conference that will bring together the victims of
terrorism in June next year. We appreciate that initiative,
view it as a positive sign and will participate fully.

However, due to the thematic scope of resolution
73/305, some fundamental aspects had to be omitted. In
its implementation, there is the need to consider that the
imperative of combating terrorism should be punishing
those participating in terrorist activities. Therefore,
we call on all States to honour their international
commitments and assume their responsibilities in
accordance with the principle of aut dedere aut
judicare, outlined in the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. It is also important to improve the mutual
legal assistance and extradition mechanisms, thereby
bolstering cooperation among the bodies tasked with
those issues.
We believe that political will to cooperate on
law enforcement is one of the most crucial factors in
decreasing the number of terrorist acts and in ensuring
the legal rights of the victims of such crimes.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
resolution 73/305.
I give the floor to the representative of Spain.