
(spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes this first formal debate of
the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect
and the report of the Secretary-General, entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884).
We support the statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect delivered by
the Ambassador of Qatar.
This debate provides an opportunity to emphasize
the need for a holistic focus that includes political,
economic and social measures of governance, as well
as legal and security measures, that make it possible
to design effective measures based on the concept
of the responsibility to protect that can be adopted
by the General Assembly, because universal values
are involved.
The paradigm shift in the United Nations and the
reform we are undertaking together with the SecretaryGeneral demand that we embrace our common goals

and develop mechanisms that make it possible to
achieve our goals in the best way possible.
Today, prevention, early warning and timely,
legitimate action that is in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations are the essential ways for us that
we can act on the responsibility to protect. Following the
adoption of the concept of sustainable peace and in the
light of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
we recognize that the United Nations should focus on
conflict prevention and address the roots of conflict,
instead of devoting a high percentage of its efforts to
responding to crisis situations. That means that we
must invest in communities and in inclusion in order to
ensure a healthy social fabric. There is no better conflict
prevention than ensuring sustainable development,
inclusion and respect for human rights and the rule of
law. That is the paradigm for the twenty-first century
on which we should concentrate all our efforts.
From that perspective, in 2016 Mexico promoted
the establishment of the Group of Friends of Sustainable
Peace, which now involves more than 40 countries and
of which we are the current Chair. That concept seeks to
consolidate the efforts of the international community
to maintain peace before, during and after conflicts, in
order to ensure that they are based on the three pillars
of the responsibility to protect in a strategic fashion that
is consistent with the Sustainable Development Goals
and the 2030 Agenda. If we want to be successful, our
actions must be focused not only on security, but also on
development, the fight against poverty and inequality,
inclusion and access to justice.
Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General when
he indicates in his report that the economic and
human costs are very high when we fail to adopt all
available measures to prevent mass atrocities. A
recent study carried out by the United Nations and the
World Bank concluded that during the past decade, the
international community spent more than $233 billion
on humanitarian responses. Had we invested more in
prevention than in response, the countries affected and
the international community as a whole would have
saved between $5 billion and $70 billion every year.
For every dollar spent on prevention, the international
community saves seven on crisis management.
The Secretary-General has also emphasized that
global and regional networks have become an integral
part of the institutional architecture to promote and
support States in implementing the responsibility to

protect and promoting international cooperation. I wish
to take this opportunity to say that beginning with the
eighth annual meeting of the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points for the responsibility to protect, which
was co-sponsored by my country and held in Helsinki
on 12 and 14 June, Mexico has a focal point in the
Global Network.
Early warning, preventive diplomacy and mediation
are intrinsic to the three pillars of the responsibility
to protect. Dialogue and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts are vital in order to consolidate international
cooperation, eradicate the underlying causes of
conflicts and promote development. The resident
coordinators and representatives of the United Nations
in each country have an objective and impartial goodfaith role to play in that regard.
Mexico is a member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, promoted by Finland and Turkey, and we
believe it is essential to strengthening the role that
mediation plays in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflict prevention. Peace has a woman’s face. The
involvement of women in endeavours for sustainable
development and mediation and in weaving the healthy
social fabric that we all wish to see is evident. It is
urgent and essential. We trust that this debate will serve
to promote mediation as long as that tool continues to
be underutilized.
Finally, we cannot talk about the responsibility
to protect without mentioning accountability. We
continue to be concerned about the Security Council’s
inaction regarding the use of the veto in situations
related to the commission of mass atrocities. Inaction
and indifference to human suffering quite simply have
no place in multilateral diplomacy and should have no
place in the United Nations.
From that perspective, since 2014 Mexico and France
have promoted an initiative urging the five permanent
members of the Security Council to voluntarily abstain
from using their veto power in situations of mass
atrocity. Security Council reform should restrict the
use of the veto or, rather, include the responsibility
that involves refraining from the use of the veto when
dealing with situations involving mass atrocities. More
than 100 States, to which we are sincerely grateful,
have joined that French-Mexican initiative already,
and we urge those that have not yet done so to join.
Investigating and prosecuting mass atrocities provide

justice to victims and serve as a deterrent for preventing
such crimes from happening again.
On 17 July, we will commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. That is the date when the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression came into
force. Mexico affirms its commitment to continuing to
strengthen the international criminal system in order
to ensure that the perpetrators of mass atrocities never
go unpunished.
In conclusion, Mexico calls resolutely for
strengthening multilateralism to help all of the
world’s people, for strengthening the United Nations
and the governance that we have established, and for
strengthening respect for international law and for
effective implementation of the legal jurisdiction of the
international courts and tribunals.