
The Philippines
supported the inclusion of this item on the agenda of

Prevention is at the core of the responsibility to
protect. National institutions for good governance
should therefore be strengthened, especially where
fighting organized crime and terrorism is concerned.
There is also the importance of ensuring strong
national defence against genocide-prone foreign State
and non-State actors, as well as reforming democracy
in order to prevent Government from capture by violent
groups, such as intolerant mass movements or organized
crime, as in the case of the drug trade. The perpetrators
of organized crime or terrorism are not congregations
of the accused entitled to the presumption of innocence
and to be treated accordingly even when they are caught
in the act. That presumption attaches once they have
been brought before a court of law, or the concept of
suspects in law enforcement would not exist.
We must professionalize security forces so that
they can protect their own citizens without harming
them. The concept of collateral damage has no more
place in police and security operations than does the
suggestion of yielding to enemies without a fight in
order to limit suffering.
We should instil values opposed to extremism,
criminality and terrorism, while promoting tolerance
and law-abiding pluralism. But criminality and
terrorism are not aspects of diversity nor features of
plurality. They are what they are. We must address the
roots of terrorism, but once terrorism has taken root,
grown and started to bear militant fruit, addressing it
must go hand in hand with pulling out the growth before
it scatters its seeds farther afield to take root, grow and
flourish in more places. That must be done with the

strictest regard for human rights and without hurting
the innocent, for the blood of the innocent fertilizes the
ground for terrorism to take root and grow.
We support the Secretary-General in putting
prevention at the centre of the United Nations peace
and security reform agenda, but part of prevention is
discouraging the misuse for political purposes of the
concept of the responsibility to protect in order to justify
foreign intervention in domestic law enforcement. That
discredits it, and invites the view that it is objective
collusion with the evil that the State seeks to stamp
out. The road to hell resounds with the footfalls of
the sanctimonious.
It is important to strengthen early-warning
mechanisms to ensure that they lead to early action,
but early warning does not include delaying the basic
State function of stopping crime. The challenge for the
responsibility to protect is to balance consistency and
predictability in the rule of law with an appreciation
of the uniqueness of each case, but in every case we
must acknowledge the universality of norms of right
and wrong. They remain opposites. While one might
disagree about what is right, let alone perfect in all
circumstances and practical in some, there can be no
doubt about what is wrong and the necessity to fight
it in every case. We cannot accept moral relativism.
There are Asian attitudes, but imagining that there
are distinctly Asian values of right and wrong is pure
nonsense. We cannot accept that there are no such
things as good and evil but, like beauty and ugliness in
the eye of the beholder, the dichotomy can be resolved
at the convenience of the actor. Moral relativity is the
greatest evil.
Our assessment of every possible case of failure
of the responsibility to protect must be impartial and
evidence based, free from politics and double standards.
It excludes the selective use of the veto in possible
responsibility-to-protect situations by the Security
Council’s permanent five, in pathetic exhibitions of
efforts to revive colonial influence.
We must ensure that when we identify vulnerable
populations, those who make criminal career choices
are not considered as vulnerable to anything but the
inexorable enforcement of the law. The Constitution of
the Philippines values the dignity of every person and
protects the most vulnerable — women, children and
the poor — who become victims of mass atrocity crimes
that they frequently cannot flee, and when they can, it

is only to be turned away at the borders of places of
greater safety across the sea. Our Constitution protects
the law-abiding who are victims of the lawless. And it
is not the responsibility of States to protect the lawless,
other than according them the most basic rights of the
accused after they have submitted to the authority of
the State.
We support the Secretary-General’s call to
strengthen the role of women in the prevention of
atrocity crimes. Women are at the forefront of our peace
processes; they are the most likely to become victims of
conflict and the first to recognize conflict’s futility and
excuse for savagery.
The Secretary-General encourages States to sign,
ratify and implement basic instruments of international
law on this subject, including the Rome Statute, but the
commitment to protecting and advancing human rights,
including the right to equal safety from criminality and
abusive State authority, survives and far exceeds the
obligation to remain in agencies that were designed for
their enforcement but that have compromised themselves
in that task. Bonds are sacred, but institutions are
merely the sum of the people who occupy them.
Despite all of this, mass atrocity crimes and inhuman
crimes committed against a handful of people, or even
one — the baby face down on the beach; girls set on fire
in iron cages; civilians bombed to test the puissance
of the new Condor Legions in Yemen; old men, young
men and boys shot out of hand; wives, mothers, women
and girls gang-raped and trafficked — and only because
they are Christians in the Middle East or Muslims in
South-East Asia. All must stop or be stopped, whatever
it takes, regardless of sovereignty, in the name of
humankind beyond borders.