
At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his report entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884). Let me also thank Australia and
Ghana for their leadership on this very important issue.

fully embrace the right of all people to peaceful existence
and protection, in all matters, from hostile actions that
could jeopardize domestic peace or harmony.
We also believe in the positive effects of preventive
action. While it is fiscally beneficial to invest in
preventive action, such investment also saves lives.
Early dialogue and action can not only prevent loss of
life, they can generate healing from the traumas that
result from the atrocities of ethnic cleansing, war crimes
and other crimes against humanity. There is therefore a
significant place for expanding opportunities for civil
society. Working together at the international, regional
and domestic levels is imperative to ensure effective
and coordinated preventive action. Community efforts
and collaboration will help to identify and de-escalate
tensions that could spiral out of control. However, there
are also times when preventive action is not enough.
That is why, despite its minimal resources, in 2005
Palau contributed two women to its first peacekeeping
mission, in East Timor. In 2008, we sent one woman
to the peacekeeping mission in Darfur, in the Sudan.
Yes, I said “women”. In Palau, we believe that the right
to peace and prosperity and their related obligations
extends to all people, whatever their colour, creed,
race or gender. We will continue to contribute to
international peacekeeping forces as an absolute
obligation. That is why Palau has the highest per capita
induction rate into the United States military, which
also focuses its efforts on peacekeeping around the
world. That is why we participate fully and proactively
in United Nations initiatives on issues such as climate
change and biodiversity that work not only to save our
planet but also to protect the economic foundations that
peace and security are based on.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Kiribati on behalf of the Pacific Island
Forum (see A/72/PV.99).

Ultimately, the fight against atrocity crimes can
be won only through group effort. Shared experiences,
collaboration and coordination at all levels will help to
keep fellow Member States in check and will ultimately
ensure the safety of our citizens and global community.

Palau is a small island developing State with a
population of approximately 20,000. We gained full
independence only 25 years ago. Despite our size,
youth and limited role in international affairs, we have
nevertheless committed to fully participating in the
international forum and in confronting the issues of
the day. With a national Constitution that protects our
cultural heritage as well as the rights of our people, we

Every nation on the planet and their peoples
deserve peace, security, independence and prosperity.
But those rights come at a price. It is not without
obligations that we inhabit our place and time on the
Earth. In true empathy, Palau will therefore continue,
with all available means, to foster the rights of all the
people on the planet through active participation and
intervention in international initiatives that protect and

improve the plight of those least capable of securing a
better life for themselves.

support of the United Nations in that endeavour will
be instrumental.