
(spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank and congratulate the
President on having organized this first formal debate
of the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect
since 2009.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement
taking stock of the current state of affairs with regard
to the responsibility to protect and shining a light on
the challenges facing the international community in
preventing genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.
My delegation also thanks the Secretary-General
for his report entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
early warning to early action” (A/72/884), which gives
particular attention to early warning and action and in
which the responsibility to protect is a key component
of that important process.
It is clear that the international community has
come a long way in the area of protection, whether
that has to do with peacekeeping, respecting and
promoting human rights, democracy and the rule of
law or preventing atrocities. However, the international
community in general, and our Organization in
particular, is still far from attaining the established
goals. If the responsibility to protect has garnered more
and more support in the international community in
recent years, the best way to implement the concept still
raises questions. How can we ensure protection while on
the one hand avoiding the uncontrolled implementation

of the responsibility to protect, and on the other the
political instrumentalization or exploitation of its noble
objectives? I want to outline my delegation’s views on
the following areas.
First, we want to recall the interlinkages among the
three pillars of the responsibility to protect and reiterate
that the third pillar falls primarily to States. However,
we must recognize that in conflict situations the
capacities of States can be insufficient or non-existent.
In those situations, the international community has
the responsibility to support them by strengthening
their capacities or providing the necessary means to
protect their people. That can be done, for instance, by
bolstering legal instruments and national institutions
and consolidating democracy and the primacy of
law. Capacity-building and technical assistance are
fundamental preventive measures that enable States
to reassert their national mechanisms for protecting
their people.
Secondly, States have to shoulder their
responsibilities to combat impunity, carry out
comprehensive inquiries and prosecute whoever is
responsible for committing mass atrocities in order
to prevent their recurrence. In that regard, national
accountability efforts must be encouraged and
supported, including by enhancing judicial cooperation
among States.
Thirdly, we want to encourage the various organs
of the United Nations system to better use the tools
available to them and to act decisively and in a timely way
to prevent mass atrocities and strengthen international
responsibilities. Moreover, important mechanisms
such as the Universal Periodic Review of the Human
Rights Council can support prevention efforts, and
we encourage States Members of the United Nations
to make better use of the Universal Periodic Review
process as a preventive mechanism. Furthermore, more
sustained guidance from the Human Rights Council
on the prevention of mass atrocities through the use of
those various mechanisms will certainly reinforce the
ability of the international community to combat such
heinous crimes. The Human Rights Up Front initiative
is also a relevant tool available to the United Nations
in the prevention and detection of situations that could
degenerate into conflict or give rise to mass atrocities.
Lastly, we pay tribute to the important role that
national and international civil society can play in
support of the promotion and implementation of the

responsibility to protect. Effective prevention requires
the active participation of civil society, the private
sector, religious leaders and individuals. In that regard,
my delegation would like to recall the Fez Process,
the first Forum on the Role of Religious Leaders in
Preventing Incitement that Could Lead to Atrocity
Crimes, which was held in Fez on 24 and 25 April 2015
and was devoted to engaging with religious leaders
and spiritual actors to develop strategies to prevent
incitement that can lead to atrocity crimes.

The Kingdom of Morocco shares the SecretaryGeneral’s firm conviction that the responsibility to
protect can be attained only by consolidating democracy
and the rule of law, as well as by implementing the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Morocco supports the
Secretary-General in all his efforts to promote the
concept of the responsibility to protect.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.