
The debate on the
responsibility to protect, as a formal agenda item of the
seventy-second session, is an important opportunity to
address the issues of the prevention of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity through open and
unhindered dialogue.
We express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for sharing his vision for collective action
and welcome the focus of his most recent report on the
issue, entitled “Responsibility to protect: from early
warning to early action” (A/72/884).
We want to emphasize the importance of a forthright
and candid process of reflection on the concept of the
responsibility to protect, so as to ensure that the varying
interpretations of and scepticism towards certain
aspects of the concept do not undermine the joint
efforts to protect populations at risk. The membership’s
constructive engagement in addressing concerns and
disagreements is very important.
The Secretary-General’s report once again
emphasizes that the responsibility to protect challenges
us to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past, when
too little was done to prevent genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity or to
protect vulnerable populations. We reiterate our full
support and appreciation to the Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, as well
as the Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, and the former Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, for
their work and dedication.
Armenia recognizes the crucial role of Special
Advisers in monitoring and reporting on situations
involving atrocity crimes. In this context, we would
like to emphasize the importance of detecting and
addressing any manifestations of hate speech, racism
and xenophobia, as well as unhindered warmongering
propaganda, in assessing specific country situations.

protection of the rights of ethnic, national and religious
groups and to denounce identity-based violence and
atrocities. To that end, Armenia, together with other
countries, has organized a number of events in recent
years, including in the framework of the Human
Rights Council and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In November, Yerevan
hosted the OSCE conference entitled “Countering and
preventing hate crimes against Christians and members
of other religious groups”.
The report’s recommendations concerning existing
human rights mechanisms, such as the special procedures
of the Human Rights Council, the treaty bodies and the
Universal Periodic Review process, deserve careful
attention and application, as they are well positioned
to play a crucial role and have a positive impact on
early prevention. Armenia has always promoted the
notion of early response, precisely in the context of
prevention, and our track record is well known. The
resolutions adopted in the Human Rights Council serve
as a basis for formulating preventive strategies against
the crime of genocide. In March, the Human Rights
Council adopted by consensus a resolution initiated by
Armenia on genocide prevention, which urges all States
to implement accepted Universal Periodic Review
recommendations related to the prevention of genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. In order to
operationalize atrocity prevention, it is essential that
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
provide States with guidance, assistance and follow-up,
as reflected in the resolution.
The proclamation of 9 December as the International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of
the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this
Crime is a manifestation of an important consensus
within the international community on preventing the
recurrence of atrocity crimes.

Armenia has consistently highlighted the
importance of prioritizing early prevention, which
includes sufficient capacity to identify early-warning
signs in situations that may deteriorate and lead to the
perpetration of mass crimes if not addressed.

Since 2015, Armenia has regularly hosted the
Global Forum against the Crime of Genocide, attended
by public, religious, academic, civil-society and media
representatives from across the world. Later this year,
the Global Forum will focus on the role that education
and media can play in preventing identity-based
crimes and countering denialism. We encourage all
Member States and all relevant United Nations entities
to contribute.

In international forums, it has been Armenia’s
long-standing policy to strongly advocate for the

The year 2018 marks the seventieth anniversary of
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of

the Crime of Genocide, which is yet another milestone
in reaffirming our collective determination to fight
impunity for the crime of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. On the occasion of this
anniversary, Armenia has proposed and supported the
launch of a purposeful United Nations-wide campaign
to raise awareness of the Convention and promote its
universalization. As a country that has consistently
advanced the issue of genocide prevention, including
within the United Nations, Armenia will continue to
make determined efforts to promote consolidated
international action aimed at the prevention of and
accountability for atrocity crimes.