
(spoke in Spanish):
We have the honour of participating in this first meeting
of the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity following the
agreement reached at the seventy-first session, and
thanks to the work of Australia and Ghana.
During the 2009 session, Andorra also expressed
its support at the outset (see A/63/PV.99), considering
the importance of implementing the concept, which is
a responsibility that each State has to all of its citizens,
in accordance with paragraphs 138 and 139 of the
2005 World Summit. Multilateralism can contribute
effectively to the success of this approach.
In this year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/884), entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
early warning to early action”, we are urged to combine
action with words in a strategy that should involve both
State institutions and civil society and create a culture
of prevention. In this regard, I would like to recall that
the President of the General Assembly warned us in
his opening remarks that prevention does not make
headlines in the press (see A/72/PV.99). In addition to
the crucial role of the media, ongoing in-depth efforts
are needed to create and strengthen prevention.

I would like to underscore three aspects of this issue
as useful principles for the responsibility to protect.
First, human rights, as early-warning indicators of
potential conflicts and their consequences on the ground,
together with the work of the Human Rights Council and
the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review
in its specific analyses and recommendations, are all
tools for identifying high-risk situations and taking
action. This meeting could not be more timely since,
as has already been mentioned, the year 2018 marks the
seventieth anniversaries of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, which are
key to the issue we are discussing today.
Secondly, and as we have reiterated on other
occasions, international justice ensures a sense of
collective responsibility. We encourage States that
have not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute,
whose twentieth anniversary we will celebrate next
month, as we fight against impunity for crimes against
humanity and in the interest of the universality of
the Statute and the International Criminal Court. We
would also urge States to sign the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, which calls
for preventive action.
Thirdly, as the reports of the Secretary-General
also highilght, education is needed to strengthen the
values of knowledge and respect for cultural diversity
and peaceful coexistence, which are inclusive values
that underpin non-discrimination in all its forms.
Through them, prevention, which is central to the work
of the United Nations in bringing about a world of
peace, can become effective. In armed conflicts, our
objective is to give maximum support to the protection
of children, and we consider it absolutely essential to
respect educational and health infrastructure and the
personnel who work in these areas.
Education for global and democratic citizenship can
be instrumental in preventing conflicts and building
resilience. Providing quality education, with values,
is also a responsibility of States in their commitment
to major transformations under the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.