
I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.
The five Nordic countries continue to be firmly
committed to the responsibility to protect (R2P). We
welcome the inclusion of R2P as a formal agenda item of
the General Assembly at its seventy-third session. This
marks the third time we held this important discussion

in a formal setting. We believe the General Assembly
should continue this practice of open and frank debate,
as repeatedly recommended by the Secretary-General.
As this is the first time that Ms. Karen Smith joins
us in the General Assembly as the Special Adviser on
R2P, we would like to extend her a special welcome. We
commend her work and that of the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Adama Dieng.
The prevention of atrocity crimes remains at the
core of the three pillars of the responsibility to protect.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s approach to
make the responsibility to protect an important part
of his broader strategy to prioritize prevention across
all pillars of the Organization’s work. We believe that
mediation and increasing mediation capacity at the
local, regional and international levels, as well as at
the United Nations, is an important part of working
towards more effective conflict prevention.
It is also crucial to continue linking R2P to other
related agendas, including peacekeeping, the protection
of civilians, women and peace and security, sustaining
peace and the Sustainable Development Goals.
With regard to the prevention of atrocity crimes, we
emphasize the role of women and youth, as they are
crucial for early warning and peacebuilding, as well as
the creation of more inclusive societies. We should take
concrete steps to end all forms of discrimination on the
basis of gender and to empower women, including by
ensuring that all girls can go to school.
The growing number of attacks against civilians,
hospitals, schools and humanitarian workers is
unacceptable. The Nordic countries call on all
Member States to uphold all their obligations under
international law, including international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law, at a time when a divided Security Council
is unable to take needed action in many serious
conflict situations.
While the Security Council is not able to act in
many situations relating to international accountability,
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
play an important role in responding to atrocity crimes.
That was demonstrated by the establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 and the independent

investigative mechanism for Myanmar. Those successes
are the direct result of the concerted efforts of Member
States committed to holding perpetrators accountable
for their actions. Ensuring accountability remains one
of the most effective ways to prevent the recurrence of
mass atrocity crimes.
We recall that States have the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute international
crimes committed within their jurisdictions. National
accountability efforts should be encouraged and
supported. The Nordic Governments also strongly
support the International Criminal Court (ICC) as
the most important institutional development in the
battle to end impunity for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It is well justified to discuss
the role of the ICC during this meeting as well, since
support for the activities of the ICC may also have a
deterrent effect.
Upholding our collective responsibility to protect
must remain at the centre of our commitment to an
international rules-based order. The multilateral
system we have all worked so hard to create deserves
our unwavering support and respect. We must urgently
increase the speed at which we move towards a
prevention-centred analysis and a culture of earlier
preventive action when signs of atrocity crimes are
identified. There are no excuses for inaction.