
We welcome the convening
of today’s debate. The inclusion of the responsibility to
protect on the formal agenda of the General Assembly
is indicative of the widespread support for this concept
and its continuing importance to our work. The debate
today is particularly timely, as we mark the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1265 (1999), on
the protection of civilians.

We have been at the forefront of international
efforts to prevent and counter identity-based hate
crimes, including the crime of genocide. Armenia
has traditionally sponsored resolutions related to this
issue, having introduced the first resolution on this
subject at the Commission on Human Rights in 1998.
Subsequently, the scope and substance of the resolutions
introduced at the Human Rights Council on the subject
have been fundamentally enriched.

Ireland has long been a strong supporter of
international human rights bodies and monitoring
mechanisms. They form an integral part of the
existing early-warning system for potential threats
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Along with the International
Criminal Court, which has a crucial role to play in
ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes,
those monitoring mechanisms are an important tool
for prevention.

The adoption, in 2015, of resolution 69/323, which
designated 9 December as the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the
Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This
Crime, was a landmark achievement in that regard.
The most recent Human Rights Council resolution on
this subject, entitled “Prevention of genocide”, which
was initiated by Armenia and unanimously adopted by
the Human Rights Council in March 2018, draws the
attention of the international community to the issue
of early warning in situations that can lead to genocide
and highlights the importance of education and regional
and subregional cooperation for prevention and holding
perpetrators accountable. Our priorities in the Human
Rights Council include fostering cooperation for the
prevention of genocide and mass atrocities and the
further development of national and international earlywarning mechanisms.
We also acknowledge certain differences of opinion
when it comes to the definition and interpretation of
the concept of the responsibility to protect, especially
given its multidimensional nature. At the same time,
that divergence in approaches should not hinder the
responsibility and commitment towards the core values,
norms and principles that the United Nations is built

As we know, 8 of the 14 current United Nations
peacekeeping missions, accounting for approximately
95 per cent of all peacekeepers, operate with a protection
of civilians mandate. However, we need to ensure that
we provide missions with the appropriate capabilities to
fulfil those mandates. Just as important are the skills of
our peacekeepers. Ireland is active in helping to build
that capacity. For example, in the past six months, we
provided two sessions of training in the protection of
civilians to fellow troop contributors.
In addition, Ireland’s new development assistance
policy has a particular focus on conflict-affected and
fragile States in recognition of the links between
crisis and conflict. We are working, for example, with
the Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation
to develop a universal training tool that can be used
to build the capacity of security sectors to prevent
conflict-related atrocity crimes.
We know that the impact of conflict on women
and girls is multifaceted and far-reaching. Ireland is a
strong supporter of the women and peace and security
agenda, which we see as an integral, indeed essential,
part of the conflict-prevention framework. Ireland has
just launched its third national action plan on women

and peace and security, within which women’s right to
equal participation and their important role as leaders
and decision-makers in all peacebuilding processes is a
particular priority.
Ireland wishes to emphasize the role that regional
organizations can play in the prevention of atrocity
crimes. The European Union is itself a manifestation
of conflict prevention through social, economic and
political cooperation. We see the value of national focal
points at the national and regional levels and support
the appointment by more regional organizations of
their own R2P focal points. This year Ireland was
also pleased to co-host with the Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect the annual lecture on R2P,
which was delivered by former Irish Deputy Prime
Minister Eamon Gilmore, who is now the European
Union’s Special Representative for Human Rights.
We recognize and value the work that Ms. Karen
Smith, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, has already been undertaking
in her short time in that vital role and pledge Ireland’s
full support in facilitating that work. Similarly, we
were pleased to support the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group’s code of conduct, which to
date has been endorsed by some 119 countries, as well
as the French and Mexican declaration on voluntary
restraint in the use of the veto by permanent members
of the Security Council. Those initiatives help to
reinforce the collective responsibility to prevent mass
atrocity crimes.
The proliferation of arms increases the likelihood
of atrocity crimes. Ireland has championed action on
explosive weapons in populated areas, and we will
advance that work at every opportunity.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my thanks to
the President for providing this opportunity to
reaffirm our shared commitment to the protection of
vulnerable populations.