
Let me first thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/73/898).
For the second consecutive year, this debate on
the responsibility to protect (R2P) is included in the
formal agenda of the General Assembly. To ensure a
continuous, constructive and sustainable dialogue, R2P
should be made a standing agenda item.
I especially would like to welcome Ms. Karen Smith
as the new Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Responsibility to Protect, a role she has carried out
actively since her appointment.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands also aligns itself
with the joint statement delivered by the representative
of Denmark on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, and with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union (see A/73/PV.93).
I would like to touch upon three points: prevention,
accountability and a different approach.
First, on prevention, when we talk about our
responsibility to protect populations from atrocity
crimes, much attention has, perhaps unfairly, been
put on the intervention aspect: how the international
community should act when such atrocities have
already been committed. However, the core aim of our
responsibility to protect is preventing such cruelties
from happening in the first place.
In this regard, I should like to emphasize the crucial
role of the Human Rights Council and of all the tools

at its disposal. Regular sessions, special procedures,
treaty bodies and the Universal Periodic Review help to
document patterns of human rights violations that might
escalate into mass atrocities. They provide us with
early-warning signs on which the High Commissioner
can brief the Human Rights Council and the Security
Council when necessary.
This valuable and essential interaction between
New York and Geneva needs a boost. The Security
Council should not ignore the possibility of being
adequately informed, and, moreover, it should not think
twice about taking timely and decisive action. Early
warnings must be answered with early action.
Where the commission of atrocity crimes could
not be prevented, the Security Council has to uphold
its responsibility to alleviate the suffering of the
peoples in conflict. This bring me to my second point:
accountability. We have to face reality. Despite public
attention and outrage over the many cases of the
most heinous crimes in the past, war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing still
occur. The horrible crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham are but one example. What
we can and must do is hold the perpetrators of such
crimes accountable.
As the host nation to the International Criminal
Court, the Netherlands relentlessly advocates for
ensuring accountability and upholding international
criminal law. Fact-finding, evidence-gathering,
investigation, attribution and, eventually, prosecution
are crucial processes in laying the groundwork for
present and future accountability. We need to end
cycles of impunity, thereby preventing recurrence.
Collective support for and cooperation with United
Nations accountability mechanisms are preconditions.
Lastly, I will say something about a new approach
to R2P.
Atrocity prevention does not stand on its own.
The core aim of the R2P principle transcends its label.
Prevention and protection of populations from the most
serious human rights violations touch on many different
areas of Government policy. If our response is to work
effectively, we need to understand the synergy between
R2P and related agendas, such as women and peace and
security, the protection of civilians, peacekeeping and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. With
regard to the latter, sustainable development will not be
achieved if we do not uphold the norms that safeguard

humanity and respect all universal human rights. That
requires a human-rights based approach in the way
we govern.
Efforts should be made not only by Member States,
domestically and collectively, but also within the
United Nations system itself. For example, the Human
Rights Up Front initiative, which is also mentioned by
the Secretary-General in his latest report on R2P, is of
great value in strengthening a United Nations systemwide, cross-pillar approach to mass atrocity prevention.
We support the call for more efficient and inclusive
United Nations and Member State engagement, also
involving local, national and regional organizations.
Enhancing United Nations inter-agency coordination,
as well as cooperation with regional actors and civil
society, is fundamental to developing a comprehensive
and context-specific prevention framework.
Today’s reality demands the strongest commitment
to the responsibility to protect. In order to save lives, the
international community must respond adequately. We
have the eyes, the ears and all means and mechanisms
to identify early warning signs. Collective political will
is the missing ingredient. We need to choose to act,
prioritize the prevention of mass atrocities and practice
what we preach.