
(spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour to stand at this rostrum under
the presidency of Her Excellency Ms. María Fernanda
Espinosa Garcés.
My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect (R2P).
Allow me, first of all, to thank the President of
the General Assembly for convening this important
meeting. Costa Rica was pleased to see the responsibility
to protect included on the agenda of the General
Assembly at its previous sessions, thereby giving us
repeated opportunities to discuss this issue. This is
especially pertinent given the turbulent times we are
currently experiencing at the global level, with millions
of people being displaced due to violence, persecution
and oppression.

We bear witness to terrible crimes on a daily basis:
sexual violence and hunger are used as weapons of war,
specific ethnic groups are the targets of genocide and
children do not have access to education or the most basic
services because their schools and medical centres have
been unscrupulously destroyed. My country reiterates
its legal, political and, above all moral commitment
to achieving the full implementation of this principle
and its three pillars outlined in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, so as to increase the capacity of
the Organization and States in matters of prevention,
early warning and effective and rapid response.
In exercising their sovereignty, States have the
primary obligation to protect their populations. For
that reason, it is necessary to establish comprehensive
measures by designing policies that foster equitable
and inclusive societies that promote non-discrimination
and the empowerment of women, where hate speech is
condemned and tolerance is encouraged. That is how
strategies should be developed — in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development — in order to
promote the integral development of our populations
while avoiding factors that lead to conflict, such as
exclusion and discrimination.
It is also essential to strengthen institutions, the
rule of law, access to justice and existing capacities.
In that regard, it is crucial that the assistance provided
by States and regional and international organizations,
as well as civil society organizations, be adapted to fit
national priorities and reflect society as a whole, taking
into account the existing structures on a case-bycase basis.
Likewise, in order to prevent the reoccurrence
of atrocities, it is imperative to deal with postconflict national conciliation processes through
transitional justice, the preservation of memory and the
reconstruction of social peace. It is therefore necessary
to put an end to impunity and bring those responsible
to justice, while refraining from granting immunity
and amnesty to the perpetrators of such crimes. My
country strongly advocates that eliminating impunity
and ensuring accountability are just as important as
preventive measures themselves.
In the same vein, Costa Rica reiterates its full
support for the International Criminal Court. We call
on those States that have not yet done so to join the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and its amendments, and call on those of us who are

States parties to comply with the Court’s decisions in
accordance with our international obligations.
Similarly, we believe that collective international
action to prevent mass atrocities must be based on
impartial information collected in such a way that
ensures it is not subject to political pressure. For that
reason, Costa Rica supports initiatives such as the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as the Human
Rights Up Front initiative.
The principle of the responsibility to protect was
conceptualized in line with States’ obligations — under
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law — to not commit systematic human
rights violations against the civilian population. Those
obligations must therefore be incorporated into the
internal legal frameworks of States. Likewise, in order
to strengthen internal early-warning mechanisms and
others for the prevention of atrocities, coordination
between the principal organs of the United Nations and
the mechanisms established under resolutions of the
Security Council must be strengthened.
It is of concern to note that, as a consequence
of political divisions and geopolitical interests, the
principal organs of the United Nations have failed to
take the necessary and effective actions to prevent
or halt attacks against the civilian population. In that
regard, the members of the Security Council, whether
permanent or elected, must honour the Charter of the
United Nations and comply with its mandate to ensure
prompt and effective action, in line with its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. We therefore call on the members of the Security
Council to support the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct against genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We also urge
the permanent members to refrain from using the veto
in such cases, in line with the code of conduct.
We also reaffirm the decisive and relevant role that
the Human Rights Council, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
treaty bodies must play in those aspects. We support
the development of initiatives such as the Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, which aim to tackle risk
factors and protect populations. Similarly, we highlight

the efforts undertaken by the Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to
Protect and express our strong support for their work.
My country considers prevention and early action
to be the most effective ways of protecting vulnerable
populations and, in line with that position, we are
making various efforts to that end. They include the
holding of a workshop in May, in collaboration with the
Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, on
strategies against discrimination based on an approach
geared towards the prevention of mass atrocities and
focused on lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex persons. Its aim was to provide theoretical
tools and prevention practices aimed at State police and
security forces, as well as prison authorities.
Costa Rica is also an active participant in
several initiatives with the aim of furthering the
implementation of the responsibility to protect, such as
the Latin American Network for Genocide and Mass
Atrocity Prevention, and Global Action against Mass
Atrocity Crimes. And, together with Denmark, Ghana
and Australia, we are part of the Global Network of
R2P Focal Points. Costa Rica welcomes the fact that,
to date, 61 members — in addition to the European
Union and the Organization of American States — have
appointed a focal point for the responsibility to protect,
thereby strengthening their preventive capacities. We
urge those States that have not yet done so to nominate
their focal point and join the Global Network. At its
latest meeting, the Global Network called to integrate
the implementation of R2P within the prevention
agendas in both New York and Geneva. My country
fully supports that.
I would like to thank the President once again for
having convened this important debate, which we hope
will help to encourage a more in-depth reflection on
this topic, as well as inspire greater progress and the
strengthening of the implementation of this principle.
This is all the more relevant at a time when the
implementation of the responsibility to protect and
the multilateral commitments that accompany it are
becoming increasingly necessary.