
I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (R2P), which
consists of 51 Member States and the European Union,
which this year is co- chaired by Qatar and Denmark.
Today marks the third formal debate at the General
Assembly on the responsibility to protect. We welcome
the support of States Members of the United Nations

for the inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda over the
past two years. It also reflects the strong interest among
Member States to share ideas and best practices about
how we can collectively improve our ability to prevent
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing.
We believe that the General Assembly should
continue this practice of open and frank debate, one
repeatedly recommended by the Secretary-General.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
responsibility to protect (A/73/898) takes stock of past
practice and includes lessons learned for prevention.
The Group welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for implementing and integrating
the responsibility to protect as an important part of
his broader strategy to prioritize prevention across all
pillars of the work of the United Nations. We appreciate
his sustained commitment to the implementation of the
Human Rights Up Front initiative, thereby strengthening
the United Nations system’s ability to prevent the
most serious human rights violations from happening,
including those that possibly lead to the commission of
atrocities. The Group commends the Secretary-General
and his Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect for their leadership in
advancing mass atrocity prevention. As this is the first
time that Ms. Smith joins us in the General Assembly
as Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, we
would especially like to welcome her.
Since 2005, considerable progress has been
achieved by Member States and other stakeholders,
including civil society, in advancing atrocity
prevention at the national, regional and international
levels. International and domestic actors have
successfully created frameworks to identify triggers
and risks in order to develop indicators and earlywarning mechanisms and institutionalize prevention
mechanisms and partnerships.
As the Group of Friends, we have also worked
towards conceptually linking R2P, where appropriate,
to other related agendas, including peacekeeping, the
protection of civilians, women and peace and security,
sustaining peace and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Today’s formal debate provides States with an important
opportunity to share experiences, best practices and
effective strategies for preventing atrocities. In that
context, it is worth highlighting that almost one third
of all Members States have appointed a national R2P

focal point and joined the Global Network of R2P Focal
Points, the largest governmental network dedicated to
preventing mass atrocities.
We are currently witnessing a divided Security
Council, unable to take timely and decisive action
with regard to multiple atrocity situations. At the
same time, however, the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council can play an important role in
responding to atrocity crimes, as demonstrated by
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. That
success is a direct result of concerted efforts by
Member States committed to holding those responsible
for atrocities accountable for their actions.
We recognize that the primary responsibility to
protect lies with Member States. But, should peaceful
means be inadequate and national authorities manifestly
fail to protect their populations, the international
community should be prepared to take collective action
in a timely and decisive manner through the Security
Council. We also commend the initiatives of Member
States to bring the perpetrators of atrocity crimes to
justice. Such crimes include war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, as reflected in the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Domestic accountability measures for atrocities
are among the most effective ways to prevent
recurrence. States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute genocide, torture and other
such crimes committed within their jurisdictions.
National accountability efforts should be encouraged
and supported, including through the strengthening
of judicial cooperation among States. Fact-finding
missions, investigative mechanisms, commissions
of inquiry and hybrid and international courts and
tribunals provide complementary avenues to enable
accountability when and where options under domestic
law prove insufficient.
While accountability is important to prevent
recurrence, our ultimate objective is to prevent atrocity
crimes from occurring in the first place. Prevention
is at the core of each of the three pillars of R2P.
Member States should identify complementary agendas
where United Nations efforts can assist in preventing
atrocities. For example, the interaction between the

Human Rights Council and the Security Council
could be strengthened to better inform the latter about
situations that may lead to atrocity crimes. Measures
taken by States to prevent atrocity crimes can also
contribute to national and regional peace and stability
and reinforce national sovereignty.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
provides a framework for global cooperation. It is a
framework for achieving a better and more sustainable
future, one that can provide and significantly
contribute to atrocity prevention efforts. Eradicating
poverty, providing development assistance and
supporting capacity- and institution-building can
address grievances and instability that may drive the
perpetration of atrocity crimes. No country or region
is immune to the risk factors for atrocity crimes. We
are increasingly concerned about the rising levels of
incitement to discrimination, hostility and violence in
all its forms, as well as hate speech and xenophobia,
which we see in many parts of the world. As SecretaryGeneral António Guterres has said, hatred is a threat to
everyone and is therefore a job for everyone.
We also strongly support an inclusive approach
to preventing atrocity crimes, one that recognizes
the critical role women play in early warning and in
promoting peacebuilding, peacekeeping, capacitybuilding and more cohesive, inclusive and resilient
societies. We should take concrete steps to end all
forms of gender-based discrimination and violence
and work to empower women as agents of change,
including by ensuring that all women have access to
quality education and meaningful participation in the
decision-making processes affecting their lives. We
recognize the important role national and international
civil society organizations play in supporting the
advancement and the implementation of R2P. In
particular, we would like to thank the Global Centre
for the Responsibility to Protect for its invaluable work
as the secretariat of the Group of Friends, both in New
York and in Geneva.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the number of forcibly
displaced people as a result of persecution, conflict and
atrocities is at its highest level since the end of the Second
World War — 70.8 million in 2018 — and the number
continues to increase. That number demonstrates why
upholding the responsibility to protect needs to be at the
very heart of our shared mission to advance peace and
security. During today’s formal debate, we look forward

to hearing from Member States on best practices to
end the current climate of impunity and inaction with
regard to the heightened risk of atrocity crimes across
the globe. Let today’s debate be a reminder of the
importance of continuing that exchange of information
and the need to strengthen our individual and collective
prevention and accountability response.
Let me conclude by saying that the era of
indifference is over, but the time of consistent and
timely action to prevent and protect has not yet begun.
As the Secretary-General notes repeatedly in his report,
more needs to be done. Let us speed the day.