AUSTRALIAN MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS E-mail australia@un.int

150 East 42" Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212-351 6600 Fax 212-351 6610 www.australia-unsc.gov.au

UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
6 September 2016

Informal Interactive Dialogue on the
Responsibility to Protect (R2P)

Statement by H.E. Gillian Bird
Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of Australia to the United Nations

(Check against delivery)

 

Mr Moderator, contemporary conflicts underscore that R2P is as important
as ever. Sadly, the indifference of some Member States to their R2P
responsibilities is a driver of much of the death and displacement we are
witnessing. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s Report
providing a vision for how we can collectively tackle obstacles to R2P’s

implementation.

Prevention is the keystone. As the Report highlights, preventive capacities
need to be cultivated at the local, national, regional and international levels

in order to translate early warning into early response. The Joint Office of the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Responsibility to Protect has a critical role to play in this context. Our
diplomatic networks also have a role to play. Australia has prioritised
atrocity risk sensitisation programs based on the UN Framework of Analysis
for Atrocity Crimes for diplomats being posted overseas, to ensure they are

better informed to identify emerging threats.

When we become aware that States are failing in their R2P responsibilities
we must speak out - in the Human Rights Council, the General Assembly,

and the Security Council. I can assure you that Australia’s voice will be

loud and clear.

Article 24(2) of the Charter reminds us that the Security Council must
discharge its duties in accordance with the Purposes and Principles of the
United Nations. Despite this, all too often the veto has been used to impede
action. The widespread support for the ACT Group’s Code of Conduct and
the French-Mexican Initiative on veto restraint demonstrates that the
Membership expects the Council to meet its Responsibility to Protect.

When prevention efforts fail, we must ensure that those who commit mass
atrocity crimes are held to account — either by national courts or the
International Criminal Court. Impunity sends a dangerous message to

perpetrators and victims — and paves the path to recurring violence. Australia recently commissioned a Domestic R2P Implementation Study. It
found that we are effectively meeting our R2P responsibilities, and identified
some areas to further strengthen Australia’s capacity to respond overseas -
which we are addressing. We can all, each and every one of us, do better
when it comes to building a collective will to prove we mean what we say,

when we say ‘never again’.

Mr Moderator, in closing, let me congratulate the Secretary-General on his
leadership on R2P and urge the incoming Secretary-General to ensure that

R2P’s implementation remains a core priority.

Australia’s Statement at the 2016 UN General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion,
From Commitment to Implementation: Ten Years of Responsibility to Protect
[Transcribed]
26 February 2016
Thank you very much, Mr. Moderator, and let me begin by also thanking the PGA for organizing
this very valuable and very lively debate. Can I especially thank all of our panelists for their very
thoughtful and forward­looking deventions.

You only need to take a very quick look at events around the globe to realize that RtoP is
needed more than ever. I think that fundamental point is well accepted. And as the panelists
have done, we see this 10th anniversary as an opportunity not just to take stock on where we’ve
gone on RtoP, but very importantly to look forward on how we can further the implementation of
RtoP in light of the experience to date.

One initiative, and it’s been pleasing to see that it has been mentioned by a number of panelists
but also a number of the speakers here today, is the initiative for a General Assembly
resolution. This would be the first substantive resolution of the GA in the 10 years of RtoP’s
existence and importantly also put RtoP firmly on the General Assembly’s agenda going
forward. Others have mentioned how important this GA role is in the foundational document that
all of our heads of states and government adopted. It envisioned a leading role for the General
Assembly in the UN on RtoP.

The Slovenian permanent representative mentioned that a zero draft has been put together by a
very broad, cross­regional group and presented to the membership just yesterday. We fully
recognize that there are different perspectives on RtoP and that’s been evident in this room
today. One of the rationales for the resolution that we’ve put forward is precisely so those views
can be shared and common ground identified. We therefore look forward to constructive
engagement in the coming weeks in the negotiations process. We are committed, like my
Ghanan colleague just mentioned, to an open, transparent, inclusive process and to consensus
adoption of this resolution. If I could finally just reiterate Australia’s support for the
French­Mexican initiatives on restraint on the use of the veto, also to the important global
network of RtoP focal points, all important initiatives, and we encourage support for them. Thank
you