REPUBLIC OF
BOTSWANA

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF
BOTSWANA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

154 EAST 46TH STREET * NEW YORK, N.Y. 10017
TEL. (212) 889-2277

 

STATEMENT BY

MR. NKOLOI NKOLOI
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
BOTSWANA PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED
NATIONS

DURING THE
INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

6 SEPTEMBER 2016
UNITED NATIONS, NEW YORK

we

Please check against delivery. Moderator;

Distinguished Delegates;

1. Let me at the outset thank the President of the General Assembly
for convening this very important interactive dialogue on the
Responsibility to Protect. The dialogue indeed provides an
opportunity for the international community to reflect on the
collective efforts to prevent atrocity crimes particularly at these
challenging times.

2. We also express our thanks to the Secretary General for his
informative report entitled “Mobilizing collective action: The
next decade of the responsibility to protect”.

3. Our word of gratitude also goes to the Assistant Secretary General
as well as the panelists for their invaluable information.

Moderator;

4. First and foremost, it is an undisputable fact that States bear the
primary responsibility to protect their populations in times of
conflict.

5. When in 2005 our leaders gathered here to codify the concept of
R2P, they were only reaffirming a sovereign obligation which has
always been recognized and respected by nation states.

6. Consistent with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter R2P
remains a core value on which to encourage the promotion and
protection of human rights.

7. Member States have mandated the Secretary General and the entire
UN system to helps meet standards set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. 10.

This, in our view, is not only consistent with the purposes and
principles of the UN Charter but it also enables the UN system, to
use all resources at its disposal, including its moral authority and
operational reach..

We wish to therefore reaffirm Botswana's commitment to the
international criminal justice system, to the respect for the rule of
law, respect for human rights, inclusive governance and
accountability.

Let me buttress this by reiterating Botswana’s strong support for the
Responsibility to Protect and we support the Secretary General’s call
for Member States to reaffirm and deepen their commitment through
a new General Assembly resolution on R2P.

Even though there has been stability in other parts of the world,
Botswana remains gravely concerned over the crimes against
humanity that continue unabated in some parts of the globe.

It is the responsibility of the international community to ensure
that institutionalized perpetration of gross human rights violations
are duly addressed and those responsible are held to account to
the fullest extent of the law.

Botswana agrees with the Secretary General’s report that, lack of
unity at the Security Council, especially at the early stage of a
crisis can be detrimental. Yet the consequences of failing to prevent
serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian
law are all too evident. This applies to individual countries and
regions.

We have witnessed this with the Syrian crisis which has and
continues to lead in massive loss of life, displaced populations, and
staggering numbers of refugees. It is estimated by the UNHCR that

3 15.

over 65.3 million people around the world have been forced to flee
their homes. Amongst them 21.3 million refugees and in Syria
alone over 13 million including women and children.

This problem is compounded by the involvement non-State actors
who continue to perpetrate terrorist acts, war crimes and crimes
against humanity ignoring their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law, especially on the protection
of populations including the most vulnerable, women and children.

In conclusion, Botswana will continue to play its part by
contributing to the promotion of R2P.