General Assembly
Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect
Secretary-General Report "Mobilizing collective action: the next decade of the responsibility to protect"
Statement by H.E. Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota
Permanent Representative of Brazil to the United Nations
6 September 2016
(check against delivery)

Mr. President,
At the outset, allow me to congratulate Ivan Simonovic for his appointment as Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect. I also take this opportunity to voice my appreciation for the job done by his
predecessor, Jennifer Welsh, always marked by respectful and constructive engagement with all delegations.

Brazil welcomes the convening of this informal dialogue, as it provides us with an opportunity to assess the
most recent report of the Secretary-General. We are however of the view that the format of in which these
dialogues have been taking place should be improved in the coming years. It is regrettable, for instance, that
the informal nature of this meeting does not allow for proper records of this very debate to be kept for future
reference - something crucial not only for the sake of transparency, but also to better understand each others'
concerns and identify common ground. The 3-minute limitation for statements does not allow delegations and
civil society to fully articulate their ideas on an issue of unquestionable importance and that, as acknowledged
by the Secretary-General, still coexits with "outstanding conceptual questions".

Since 2005, the Security Council adopted 50 resolutions that refer to the responsibility to protect – 13 of them
over the last year. As the most inclusive and democratic organ of the United Nations, this General Assembly
should not shy away from assuming its legitimate role in shaping the debate on enhancing the protection of
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. It is high time the
General Assembly recovers ownership in this realm and provides an objective reflection of the lessons learned
over the last eleven years. Brazil remains convinced that the adoption of a meaningful and forward-looking
General Assembly resolution on R2P would be pivotal in this endeavor.

Mr. President,
The 21st Century provides sufficient ample evidence to the effect that, more often than not, military intervention
increases civilian suffering and vulnerability, due to unintended casualties, suffering and destruction, as well as
to the dissemination of instability. In short, we have witnessed more than sufficient examples of interventions
that caused more harm than good. This is why, in exercising its responsibility to protect, we must
simultaneously exert a responsibility while protecting.

In other words, our collective responsibility does not need to translate into collective security action in order to
be effective: often times, it can be fully exercised through non-coercive measures - or, if coercion is
considered, through sanctions rather than military intervention. We need to value, pursue and exhaust all nonmilitary means available for the protection of civilians under threat of violence. Brazil concurs with the
Secretary-General in his assessment that "the use of particular preventive and responsive tools can and
frequently should follow a sequential logic" - meaning, above all, that the use of military force should not be our
first, but our last option. This is what stands behind the notion of "logical sequencing" alluded to in the RwP
concept paper (A/66/551-S/2011/701).

Under exceptional circumstances, if military intervention is envisaged and duly authorized, its implementation
must be judiciously carried out so as not to harm those whose very protection is being invoked. Action must be
judicious, proportionate and strictly limited to the objectives of the mandate. Member States have a right to
expect full accountability from those to whom authority is granted to resort to force.

In this regard, Brazil welcomes that the consideration of reporting and reviewing procedures for the
implementation of Security Council resolutions was listed by the Secretary-General in his previous report as a
priority for the present decade. In order to achieve this, Brazil has proposed two practical steps, both of draw
inspiration from already existing mechanisms created by the Security Council. Firstly, to draw from the
peacekeeping framework the use of sunset clauses and enhanced reporting to delegations. Secondly, to
create monitoring mechanisms by establishing panels of experts modeled after those which oversee the work
of UN sanctions committees.

It is crucial that the Security Council be kept well informed about military action carried out on its behalf in order
to adequately fulfill its role in legitimizing the use of force. This role involves not only deciding whether to
initiate armed coercion but also ensuring its proportional use and assessing the appropriate time to conclude
military operations, thereby ensuring compliance with the respective mandate and with international
humanitarian law.

Mr. President,
R2P is more about prevention than about response. For the concept to live up to its original humanitarian
ethos, it must not be interpreted as primarily aimed at the imposition of coercive measures - but rather as an
enabler to assist States in developing the capacity to protect their populations and in building safer societies.

Prevention should be interpreted in broad terms: it involves promoting sustainable development, food security,
the eradication of poverty and the reduction of inequality. It involves addressing intolerance, discrimination and
other legitimate grievances that may be at the root of conflict. And it involves taking preventive diplomacy
seriously, with priority being given to situations that present high risk, such as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

International criminal justice also plays a crucial role, including due to its deterrent effect. As a proud founder of
the International Criminal Court, Brazil encourages those who have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute.

It represents a key dimension of the rule of law that all States should commit to.

Mr. President,
Allow me to return to the question of the desirability of a General Assembly resolution on this subject. Brazil is
convinced that it would contribute to overcome mistaken assumptions and clarify the areas of convergence that
unite us. We all share a common commitment to protect civilians in situations of conflict. We are ready to
exercise our individual and collective responsibilities in full conformity with the UN Charter and international
human rights, humanitarian and refugee laws.

Individuals in one State are no less deserving of our protection than those in other States, including in illegally
occupied territories. In the context of the current refugee crisis, a recommitment to our responsibility to protect
is crucial. It is after all inconsistent to uphold the notion of a collective responsibility to protect civilians in
situations of conflict and turn one's back on the very civilians fleeing atrocities whey they knock on your door.

Finally, Mr. President,
Brazil shares the Secretary-General's frustration with the growing inability of the Security Council to provide
solutions for situations in which civilians are endangered. We are convinced that one important aspect of the
problem lies in the organ's composition and methods of work. A reformed Security Council, with expansion in
both categories of membership, has become an overdue task for the Organization. We also agree with the
Secretary-General in his assessment that the protection of civilians would benefit from greater interaction
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.

Brazil’s Statement at the 2016 UN General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion, From
Commitment to Implementation: Ten Years of Responsibility to Protect [Transcribed]
26 February 2016
Thank you, Mr. Moderator, and I think I’d like to start by saying that this is a difficult time for
civilians caught in conflict, and I believe that they are much worse off now than they were 10
years ago. This should be the very sobering starting point of the record of the past 10 years,
and not an encouraging one. And I think that the debate today (which was not a monologue, by
the way, and that is welcome in itself) raises moral issues and practical issues.

There is a moral dilemma here in the way we envision the third pillar, in particular, and Libya is
the obvious example and the issue that cannot be swept under the carpet. And why is this so?
Because a high moral standard was raised in defense of military intervention to protect civilians,
but this intervention has actually made the situation for civilians much worse than it was before.

So, the “Do no harm” precept was not observed in Libya. And there is something of a
questionable morality about this, which we must address as we go forward, otherwise we will
not be able to go forward.

The other point is that we talk a lot about prevention, but there are very simple ways of
demonstrating our commitment to prevention that are not taking place at this very moment. I
think a very good place to start with prevention would be to concentrate on Israel/Palestine, and
I was surprised and I was surprised not to hear the word “Palestine” by any of the panelists this
morning. This would go a long way to helping prevent violent extremism that conduces to
terrorism, and other tensions in the Middle East, and the Arab world broadly speaking.

Another modest contribution to prevention would be to contribute to the peacebuilding fund, for
example. And we are very struck in the discussions for the peacebuilding architecture, to see
the level of resistance to and assessed contributions fund of even very modest proportions in
that context. So I find that those who express some skepticism with respect to the original
design of RtoP, should not be dismissed as enemies of the protection of civilians. I think there is
a debate here about preserving the highest possible moral standard for UN action and
strategies at a time that civilians seemed to be especially under stress. And I would also argue
that those fleeing conflict, and they are directly fleeing the effect of the RtoP crimes, should also
be protected and treated with humanity. So it would be inconsistent to assume or uphold a
collective Responsibility to Protect civilians when they are in their own country, threatened by
these crimes, but to turn their backs on these refugees and migrants when they knock on your
door. So the debate is quite wide, it has become more complex, and I am actually pleased that
we are having a dialogue and not a monologue