Statement delivered by the Delegation of Canada to the United Nations, at the United
Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
25 February 2016
We appreciate very much the convening of this meeting. Canada, as you know, has been a
longstanding supporter, even originator of the concept of Responsibility to Protect and we
remain so today. We’re a steadfast supporter of all efforts to prevent genocide, ethnic
cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity. We believe that we need to move
forwards towards a more focused early coordinated and proactive approach towards atrocity
prevention, and move away from a culture of simply reacting.

In this regards, we continue to support the efforts of the UN towards mediation and conflict
prevention. We commend the recommendations made and the recent reviews of the HIPPO
and peacebuilding architecture to include an added focus on prevention efforts. We will also
continue to champion the values of inclusiveness and accountable governance, respect for
diversity and peaceful pluralism and, as well, human rights.

Canada is a very strong supporter of goal 16 of the STGs, which we see as a fundamental
aspect towards protection because it, first and foremost, establishes the proper institutions to
allow prevention and protection.

Second, Canada believe that the UN should increase its capacity to provide earlier and more
coherent human rights support before a crisis emerges and, in this regards, it is of utmost
importance to support the 'Human Rights Up Front' Initiative, taking note of the SG’s personal
commitment on this initiative, including the prominence it has received leading up to the World
Humanitarian Summit.

Finally, we believe there are opportunities to ensure better integration of atrocity prevention in
a more proactive way. We advocate for the more comprehensive use of early warning tools,
such as the UN framework of analysis for atrocity crimes