General Assembly informal interactive dialogue on the Report of the Secretary-General
on the Responsibility to Protect

The responsibility to protect and accountability for prevention

Statement of the Republic of Croatia
6 September 2017, New York

Mr. President,

Let me begin by strongly welcoming the holding of the interactive dialogue on the
Responsibility to Protect for the ninth year ina row.

While aligning with the EU statement, I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Guterres, and the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Mr.

Simonovi¢ for their continuing efforts in keeping R2P high on our agenda. After
more than a decade since the initiation of the concept, the time has come to step
up our joint efforts and rethink our commitments for truly delivering on the
promise of “Never again.”

Over the last two years, the world has continued to witness the consequences of
the violations of human rights, international humanitarian law and the lack of
governments’ accountability. The biggest refugee crisis since the Second World
War, affecting many countries, serves as a telling example of unsuccessful atrocity
prevention with an international implication, spreading well over regional
boundaries. We try to respond to these crises reactively, generating great human
and financial cost to everyone involved. Yet, we continuously fail to use the
opportunities to prevent and timely address atrocity crimes and protect
vulnerable populations.

In societies where human rights violations already happened, we advocate for an
inclusive and nationally owned process of transitional justice that can be
instrumental in reducing the risks of relapsing into conflict. In this context, we see
a fundamental value of the new Peacebuilding Architecture, contributing to the
commitment and responsibility to building national capabilities and resilient
societies in conflict-affected states.

Putting our national commitments towards the concept into practice, Croatia has
appointed an R2P Focal point at a senior level, and calls on other countries to do
the same. Our unwavering support is also reflected in the decision to integrate a
module on R2P in the curricular program of educating future generations of our
diplomats. As mentioned on many previous occasions, Croatia strongly welcomes the joint
French-Mexican initiative, as well as the ACT initiative of adopting the Code of
Conduct for the responsible use of the veto in the Security Council, and remains a
staunch supporter of the work of the International Criminal Court.

As a current member of the Human Rights Council, Croatia will encourage the
strengthening of early warning and early action mechanisms, as well as tighter
links between HRC and the Security Council. In addition, we support the increased
willingness of the international community to take collective action through the
Security Council in occasions of manifest failures of national authorities’ to
protect their populations from violations of human rights.

In this sense, please be assured that Croatia remains fully committed to assigning
the greatest priority to this valuable principle through applying and making the
most of a wide scope of our political, diplomatic and humanitarian tools, as well
as our network of global partners.

CROATIA

PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
NEW YORK

Check against delivery

Statement by

HE. Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak
Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Croatia

at the

Informal interactive dialogue on the
Responsibility to Protect

6 September 2016

United Nations, New York

820 Second Avenue,19th Floor, New York, NY 10017
tel. (212) 986-1585, fax (212) 986-2011
e-mail: cromiss.un@mvep.hr

http://un.myp.hr Mr President,

Allow me at the outset to thank you for convening a dialogue on the Responsibility to
Protect, an issue which epitomizes the very purpose of this Organization.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union, and I would like
to make some additional remarks in my national capacity.

We appreciate and share the views expressed in Secretary-General’s report on
“Mobilizing collective action: The next decade of the responsibility to protect” and wish
to thank him for placing the advancement of the responsibility to protect at the core of his
engagement, in our joint efforts to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

We would at the same time call for the next Secretary-General to make R2P one of his or
her core priorities, and to further build on the achievements of the Human Rights Up
Front initiative.

In addition, we would like to extend our sincere appreciation for the effort invested and
work carried out by Secretary General’s special adviser on R2P Ms. Jennifer Welsh and
we congratulate Mr. Ivan Simonovié on being appointed as her successor.

Mr President,

When it comes to further success in advancing this important agenda, we must firstly
remind ourselves that we are faced with a frightening reality of unprecedented suffering
caused by conflicts in many parts of the world, and thus we have a duty to act when and
where the lives of civilians are threatened.

We must also recognize as a severe global threat the emergence of violent extremists and
non-state armed groups who brazenly defy international humanitarian law and glorify
their crimes, thus undermining the fundamental principles of our common humanity.

A worrying decline in compliance with international law, including intentional attacks on
schools, hospitals, humanitarian workers, peacekeepers and journalists, is deeply
disturbing.

In this context, we reiterate that conflict prevention and sustaining peace must lie at the
core of all our efforts to ensure protection of civilians. This involves reading with
attention early signs, and the effective elimination of root causes of conflict, starting with
the lack of development, justice and respect for human rights. The Framework of
Analysis of Atrocity Crimes is certainly an important tool in this regard.

Similarly, we add to the calls for ensuring coherence between R2P and other processes,
which go beyond Agenda 2030 to also include peacekeeping, peacebuilding, and
disarmament. Mr President,

We have stated on multiple occasions that the protection of civilians is first and foremost
a responsibility of national authorities. However, the international community has to take
on its part of the responsibility for protection, and take collective action through the
Security Council if and when national authorities manifestly fail to protect their
populations.

Croatia fully supports the code of conduct regarding Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as the French-Mexican
initiative on the suspension of the veto power in cases of mass atrocities.

Of critical importance is also ensuring compliance with the obligations of all parties
under international humanitarian law and ensuring accountability when atrocities do
occur. Croatia recalls the further strengthening of the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to take a strong responsibility in prosecuting atrocity crimes committed by
State armies or Non-State Actors.

Global and regional networks have become an integral part of the institutional
architecture in encouraging and assisting States to implement the responsibility to protect.

Member States have an integral role to play in building capacities, but also should
exercise a greater willingness to share sensitive information on risk factors.

It is in this regard crucial to develop comprehensive protection strategies in close
consultation with the host Government, local authorities, contributing countries, the civil
society and other relevant actors.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our support for the adoption of a substantive General
Assembly resolution on the Responsibility to Protect, as well as for placing the annual
dialogue on the formal agenda of the General Assembly, as small, but significant steps in
translating principles into concrete action to protect the human life and reaffirm the
principle of humanity.