Statementof the Arab Republic of Egypt
at the
Informal Interactive Dialogue of the General Assembly on the Responsibility to
Protect

(Tuesday 6 September 2016)

Mr. President,

I would like to begin my statement by extending my thanks to the President of the General Assembly for
convening this informal interactive dialogue on the ‘Responsibility to Protect.’ Egypt welcomes the
convening of these annual meetings as they allow for the continued engagement by the General Assembly
on this important matter with the aim of reaching consensus on R2P and on the way forward, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

This year we consider the eighth and final report of the current Secretary General on the responsibility to
protect. More than ten years have passed since the adoption of the World Summit Outcome Document
in which member states expressed their commitment to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing. We would like to seize this opportunmity to raise a number
of points:

First, the primary responsibility to protect populations from such crimes rests with member-states. The
principal role of the international community in this regard should be to encourage and assist states in
fulfilling these responsibilities while respecting the principle of national ownership regarding the policies
and programmes pursued. Egypt welcomes the reference in the report that there is a convergence of the
views of memberstates on this very important issue.

Second, notwithstanding the noble goals which the notion of R2P seeks to achieve, we believe that R2P
still contains political and legal gaps, which if left unresolved and not clearly defined would do more
harm than good with regards to the universal acceptance of the principle of R2P. Currently, R2P is a
broad political commitment that has yet to evolve legally. As such, it is imperative that an agreement be
reached on the conceptual framework of the principle before discussing practical aspects pertaining to
the operationalization of the concept. A lot of work still needs to be done to further clarify this important
concept and bring it in comformity with the UN Charter and the relevant principles of international law.

It is our view that such clarifications are an essential prerequisite for the inclusion of R2P on the formal
agenda of the General Assembly. One such area where further clarrification is required is the need to
define the relationship between the three pillars for the framework of imlementation of R2P. In this vein,
it is our view that the three pillars should operate sequentially and not be implemented simultaneously.

We welcome however the reference in the report that military means should only be a measure of last
resort and upon prior authorization by the Security Council.

Third, while we fully support the view that prevention lies at the core of the responsibility to protect, we
nevertheless assert that any international strategies in this regard should garner the wider support of the
general membership. Failure to do so may raise suspicions of memberstates who may misconstrue such
policies as tools that can be manipulated to intervene in the internal affairs of vulnerable countries for
political gain. As such, any reference to non-consensual initiatives or strategies developed outside inter- governmental processes should be avoided until they are duly considered and adopted by memberstates
including the “Human Rights Upfront Initiative,” and the “Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.”
Only then can they be integrated into methodologies used by the UN system.

Mr. President,

In conclusion, I would like to assert Egypt's unwaivering commitment to the concept of R2P as delineated
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document. In this vein, we view current interactive dialogoes as
essential prerequisites towards reaching a consensus on all outstanding aspects pertaining to the concept,
in a manner that would enhance our ability and capacitites to provide protection for vulnerable
populations on the ground.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of Egypt to the United Nations, at the United
Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
25 February 2016
Notwithstanding the noble goals that the notion of Responsibility to Protect seeks to achieve,
namely the prevention of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing,
we nonetheless believe that the notion still contains serious political and legal gaps which, if
left unresolved and clearly undefined, and where attempts are pursued to hastily rush the
concept would actually do more harm than good with regards to the universality of the
Responsibility to Protect concept, rather than further its implementation as we all seek to
achieve.

As was shared by several other delegations today, Egypt believe that the informal interactive
dialogue has unfortunately been very much a monologue that has failed to address the
numerous concerns of member States in this regard. This is clearly illustrated by the numerous
requests put forth by the Egypt in these interactive dialogues asking the SG to delineate the
relationship between the three pillars and the issues of sequencing between them, to no avail.

In this regard, we still, and as much as many other countries, have legitimate concerns that
the notion of Responsibility to Protect may be manipulated for political objectives aimed at
intervening in the internal affairs of some member States.

Finally, an insistence to incorporate, in the discussion of Responsibility to Protect, notions and
concepts that are, at least, controversial and have not been subjected to the intergovernmental
process of negotiations before their adoption exacerbates this same feeling of mistrust
regarding the concept by some member States