Statement delivered by France – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016 
[TRANSLATION] 
Thank you Mr. Moderator, 
I would like to thank the president of the General Assembly for his initiative to invite Members 
States to this reflection on the Responsibility to Protect, which allows us to remain mobilized on 
this fundamental issueI would like to recognize the important role played by the Special Advisor on the Prevention of 
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, pay tribute to the dynamism and exceptional work of the former 
the Special Advisor on the Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Jennifer Welsh and welcome the 
appointment of Mr. Šimonovic.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-­‐General for his report, which can serve us as a 
compass guiding our actions in preventing mass atrocity crimes. We must, as stressed by the 
Secretary-­‐General, turn thinking into actionTen years after 2005’s surge of the concept, faced with a government that does not want to 
protect its population, or that is causing the violence, faced with leaders who organize 
massacres, the international community is still too often silent. This is why we must examine 
the means to overcome the challenges to R2P’s implementationThe Security Council must not be paralyzed when confronted with situations where atrocities 
are being committed or are like to be committed. It is with that aim that France proposed that 
the five permanent members of the Council restrain temporarily and collectively from using the 
veto in situations of mass atrocities. This voluntary approach does not require revising the 
Charter, but a political commitment. We also continue to support other initiatives that aim to 
restraint veto use in situations of mass atrocitiesThis is why we encourage Members States that have yet to do so to support our initiative and 
the ACT’s Code of Conduct.

As you know, France and Mexico jointly proposed an initiative that has received the support of 
86 Member States. Together with the ACT Code of Conduct, to which France has subscribed, 
both initiatives highlight the Member States’ interest on this subject. More than ever, it is in our 
common interest that the Security Council play a comprehensive role in the most pressing 
situations, in the service of our organization and of our values