GEORGIA

Statement by Mr. Vakhtang Makharoblishvili,
Chargé d’Affiars of the Permanent Mission of Georgia to the
United Nations

 

Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Report of the Secretary-
General on the Responsibility to Protect: “Mobilizing collective action: the next
decade of the responsibility to protect”

6 September 2016, New York

Check against delivery
Mr. Moderator,

Georgia aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union earlier today and I'd
like to make few remarks in my national capacity.

Georgia reiterates its commitment to the consistent implementation of R2P via the three-
pillar framework. We attach great significance to the Global Network of R2P and here I'd
also like to acknowledge the important work of Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and Responsibility to Protect to further mainstream R2P through the UN system.

It is a joint responsibility of the international community to help protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. We, the UN Member
States should do our utmost to strengthen the efforts in fulfilling the collective
responsibility to protect populations in the face of imminent threat in accordance with
international law.

Georgia, as a country that has experienced several waves of ethnic cleansing and continues
to suffer from the foreign occupation of two of its regions, where grave and systematic
human rights violations need to be addressed, clearly recognizes the importance of the
principle of responsibility to protect.

We welcome the recent Report of the Secretary-General on “Mobilizing collective action:
the next decade of the responsibility to protect”. We fully concur with the view that the
implementation of the R2P has to move from commitments to actions and we need to take
common efforts to remove the barriers to the implementation of the principle.

The existing international and regional human rights mechanisms should remain in
forefront and should play major role in the implementation of Responsibility to Protect..

Information on the Statement delivered by the Delegation of Georgia to the United Nations,
at the United Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion on "From
commitment to implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by
the President of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
26 February 2016
On 26 February 2016, in New York, the President of the United Nations General Assembly H.E.

Mr. Mogens Lykketoft convened thematic panel discussion on “From Commitment to
Implementation: Ten Years of the Responsibility to Protect”.

The leaders and eminent experts involved in the creation, development and implementation of
R2P participated in the meeting. Panelists included Mr. Gareth Evans, Co-Chair of the
International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty and of the International Advisory
Board of the Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, Ms. Navi Pillay, former United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Dr. Edward C. Luck, former United Nations
Secretary-General’s Special Advisor on the Responsibility to Protect and the United Nations
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect Special Adviser for Ms. Jennifer Welsh. The
United Nations Secretary-General’s Special Advisor on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama
Dieng, moderated the discussion.

The event provided an opportunity to mark the first decade of the Responsibility to Protect, and to
consider how it can best contribute to future efforts to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity in the decade to come. Panellists reflected
on the progress made to date, current and emerging challenges, and opportunities to accelerate
implementation.

In his statement, Charge d'affairs of the Mission of Georgia to the UN, Mr. Vakhtang
Makharoblishvili welcomed the convening of today’s panel discussion on the issue, which is even
more important, relevant, timely and necessary than ever before. According to him, to help
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is
and should be the focus of international community.

Mr. Makharoblishvili underlined that as a conflict affected country, Georgia is also in an urgent
need of international oversight of the enforcement of the R2P and international involvement in the
protection of civilians in the occupied Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, where the
foreign occupation continues and increasing number of grave human rights violations need to be
addressed.

In this context, the Representative of Georgia once again condemned Russia’s constant denial to
give access to international monitoring mechanisms, including the EU Monitoring Mission in
Georgia, to the occupied regions. In this regard, he recalled that the panelist Madam Navi Pillay
had been also denied access to those territories when she visited Georgia in 2014 in her capacity
of the UN High Commissioner of Human Rights.

In conclusion, Mr. Makharoblishvili underlined that the UN Member States should strengthen their
efforts in fulfilling their collective responsibility to protect, do not fail to rise to the challenge of
protecting populations in the face of imminent threat and focus on a responsible, collaborative
approach to the enforcement of international law