General Assembly Informal Interactive Dialogue on the
Responsibility to Protect Statement by Mr. Gus Miclat,
International Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect
1. Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to
convey my gratitude for theopportunity to speak. I would like to also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Ivan Šimonovic, for moderating this meeting and
the panelists for their interventions.

2. My name is Gus Miclat and I am the Executive Director and Co-Founder of the Initiatives
for International Dialogue, a regional advocacy and peace-building organization based in
the Philippines. I am also a Steering Committee member of the International Coalition for
the Responsibility to Protect (ICRtoP) which, with its 90 plus members working in over 40
countries, is the only global civil society network working to protect populations through
the implementation of RtoP.

3. First, I would like to welcome the Secretary-General’s latest report and applaud the
progress that has been made in advancing the Responsibility to Protect. Like the SecretaryGeneral, I believe that informed and coordinated collective action is one of the most
important and potentially powerful tools available to prevent and respond to atrocity
crimes. For example, this can be seen in the strides that the Mindanao Peaceweavers (MPW)
and the All-Out Peace (AOP) movement, two of the broadest civil society peace networks in
my country that my organization anchors, have made towards the peace process there.

4. The MPW developed a Mindanao Peoples’ Peace Agenda (MPPA) that reflected the
aspirations for peace from the point of view of grassroots citizens directly affected by the
conflict, which served as a framework for our collective action and engagement in the peace
process. It goes without saying that the Agenda was a key input in the deliberations of both
the Philippine government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front’s (MILF) peace panels,
who eventually inked a peace agreement in March 2014 after almost two decades of war. The
AOP meanwhile helped dissipate, if not arrest, a rising tide of vile, bigoted and anti-Muslim
rhetoric in the country that climaxed in the call for an “all-out war” against the Muslims
following a botched anti-terrorist operation of the government, resulting in the deaths of 44
Special Forces commandos, 18 MILF combatants, and 5 civilians near a MILF camp in
January of 2015. Through AOP, motivated peace networks and civil society groups worked

together to call for justice and accountability, honor those who had fallen, and helped to
simmer the tensions as an “all-out war” was averted.

5. However, through my work, I have also seen the disastrous outcomes that hail from the
failure to work collectively to prevent atrocity crimes. I come from a region that has
witnessed such horrible events as the loss of 25 percent of Cambodia’s population due to
atrocities by the Khmer Rouge. The East Timorese population was decimated by almost one
fourth of its total during the illegal occupation of its country by Indonesia, who itself
suffered a pogrom of more than a million killings perpetrated by the Suharto dictatorship.

But daily horrors are still ongoing, exemplified in the increasingly dire plight and continued
statelessness of the Rohingya in Burma. It is even sadder that their condition continues to
this day despite the recent election of an avowed democratic government led by the
democracy icon and Nobel peace laureate Aung San Suu Kyi.

6. As these past and ongoing situations from my region all too clearly show, one of the most
perplexing obstacles that RtoP faces is the failure to invest in prevention. As the SecretaryGeneral iterated, rhetorical support for atrocity prevention itself does not protect
populations from atrocity crimes. A failure to turn commitments into concrete action not
only costs innocent lives, but also forces the international community to fall back on
coercive measures, which are costlier to mobilize and themselves can have destructive
effects. The ICRtoP appeals to States to recommit to the prevention of atrocities by taking
concerted action to institutionalize preventive measures and policies at the national,
regional, and international levels.

7. Central to moving words to deeds is the development of coordinated and inclusive
prevention initiatives and policies that are in sustained partnership with or informed by civil
society. Such actors are instrumental in leading and implementing preventive measures,
ranging from locally structured initiatives through to advocacy at the international level.

Civil society has also continuously been at the forefront of taking action to address past and
current atrocities in my region, and globally, through promoting justice and accountability,
monitoring and reporting human rights violations, and working directly with communities
affected by conflict and atrocities. The ICRtoP encourages Member States to invest in
building and institutionalizing relationships with civil society so that collectively we can
work to coordinate efforts to prevent future atrocity crimes.

8. An additional measure that will support the development and implementation of holistic
policies and preventive action is prioritizing the mainstreaming of RtoP. Other sectors share
similar prevention measures and peace and security objectives, and their promotion aids in
the implementation of RtoP. Understanding such mutual linkages and exploring how
existing efforts may address the risks associated with atrocities is essential for a more
informed and effective approach to prevention. For instance, women and girls are
disproportionately affected by atrocities and discrimination, and policies violating women’s
rights are often indicators of or can amount to atrocity crimes. The protection and
empowerment of women is essential in recognizing early warning signs and preventing
atrocities, while the meaningful participation of women in society and peace and security
processes has been proven time and again to contribute to sustainable peace. The pro-active
domestic translation into policies and mechanisms of the Women, Peace and Security
agenda will help institutionalize this aspiration.

9. Development aid also provides an often overlooked, yet integral part in preventing the
perpetration of atrocities and helping to rebuild more sustainably peaceful societies in their
wake. Although a great step forward was taken last year to link development and conflict
prevention in the Sustainable Development Goals with the inclusion of Goal 16, we must
work together with development providers and practitioners to further incorporate an
atrocity prevention lens into development programming to ensure the efficacy and
sustainability of development aid in “at-risk” societies to prevent atrocities or their
recurrence.

10. Furthermore, Mr. President, as the UN body tasked with making the greatest
international peace and security decisions, the Security Council bears the responsibility to
take leadership in implementing preventive and swift action in the presence of early
warning signs. Disunity prevents the Council from fulfilling its core obligation to promote
international peace and security as well as to uphold the international community’s RtoP,
and has tragic and dire consequences. The ICRtoP strongly encourages the Security
Council’s Permanent Members to demonstrate their support for strengthening unity in this
body when facing imminent or ongoing atrocities through exercising restraint of their veto
power against resolutions that seek to prevent or halt such crimes. The ICRtoP also urges all
States to express or reaffirm their support for the Accountability, Coherence, and
Transparency (ACT) Group’s Code of Conduct, as well as for the political declaration for a
regulation on the use of the veto jointly initiated by France and Mexico.

11. The ICRtoP would also like to take this opportunity to encourage Member States to act
on the Secretary-General’s recommendation to strengthen their commitment to the
Responsibility to Protect through developing a new General Assembly resolution. The
ICRtoP continues to urge States adopt a resolution that reaffirms their commitment to RtoP,
recalls the primacy of preventing these crimes, expresses support for the UN Office on
Genocide Prevention and RtoP, and formalizes the annual dialogue process.

12. Finally, Mr. President, the ICRtoP continues to stand steadfast in its commitment to
serve as a partner for actors at all levels as we all work together towards the protection of
populations from atrocity crimes into the next decade of the Responsibility to Protect.

Check against delivery
“From Commitment to Implementation: Ten Years of the Responsibility to Protect”
Thematic Panel Discussion Convened by the President of the General Assembly
Statement by William Pace
International Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect
26 February 2016

1. Mr. President, Mr. Deputy Secretary-General, Excellencies, colleagues, I am honored to speak on behalf of the
International Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect at today’s unprecedented thematic panel focusing on
RtoP. President Lykketoft, we especially appreciate your presidency’s support for the Responsibility to Protect
norm. My name is William Pace, founding Steering Committee member of the ICRtoP. The ICRtoP is the world’s
only global civil society network, whose 89 members work to prevent and respond to atrocity crimes through
the implementation of the Responsibility to Protect.

2. We would like to thank the Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for moderating
this meeting, and for his extraordinary work as Under Secretary-General, as well as congratulate the very
distinguished panel of Special Adviser Jennifer Welsh, Navi Pillay, Edward Luck and Gareth Evans.

3. Mr. President, the fact that the General Assembly is gathered here today to mark the ten-year anniversary of this
landmark achievement is itself a sign of the enormous progress the Responsibility to Protect has made in
becoming a universal norm. We celebrate the increasing consensus that sovereignty cannot serve as a shield to
commit the worst crimes under international law. However, we must not be blind to the difficulties that lie
ahead with the implementation of RtoP. The criminal starvation of entire communities in Syria, the grisly use of
cluster munitions against civilians in Yemen, and the abduction of women in South Sudan and Nigeria are just a
few reminders of the limitations of well-meaning rhetoric on RtoP.

4. Nevertheless, such challenges only serve to reinforce, not undermine, the need for the Responsibility to Protect,
and increase the urgency of taking strong, tangible actions to implement the norm. Those actions to put RtoP
into practice can take many forms. At the ground level, the ICRtoP encourages governments and international
organizations to deepen their cooperation with civil society as a way to uphold RtoP. Civil society actors are
often the first to witness indicators of atrocities and their commission, and are thus frequently the primary
preventers and responders to these crimes. Investing in civil society is therefore an investment in the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and ethnic cleansing.

5. At the national level, the ICRtoP urges States to consider building national architectures for atrocity
prevention. A “whole of government” approach can transform atrocity prevention and responses from
fragmented, often delayed reactions—discussed only after such crimes are imminent or ongoing—into a core
priority of the state. The ICRtoP welcomes action by States to undertake such an approach, which can include
appointing a Focal Point, developing a national platform, creating a Parliamentary Group, etc., as this will enable
governments to become better equipped to prevent and respond to atrocities more quickly and efficiently.

INTERNATIONAL COALITION FOR THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

6. In order to strengthen implementation of the norm at the national, regional, and international levels, the ICRtoP
would like to underscore the importance of mainstreaming RtoP within other thematic agendas that share
similar conflict prevention strategies and objectives. For example, sustainable development assistance that
spurs economic growth and social development can defuse triggers or incentives for committing atrocity
crimes. In the same vein, disarmament initiatives that strive to prevent “the means” with which atrocities are
perpetrated from falling into the wrong hands can bolster a State’s ability to uphold its RtoP. Additionally,
strengthening the role of women in the implementation of RtoP—as well as recognizing how gender-based
human rights violations can serve as indicators of atrocity crimes—can enhance implementation of both RtoP
and the Women, Peace, and Security agenda. To improve our collective capacity to prevent atrocities, we
must therefore strive to better understand how existing programs and activities on these other thematic issues
can explicitly address the risk of their commission.

7. Mr. President, when it comes to timely and decisive responses within the Security Council, there has perhaps
stood no greater impediment to implementing RtoP over the past ten years than the irresponsible use of the
veto in situations of atrocity crimes. Within the past few years alone, we have seen four vetoes destroy the
possibility of any unified international response to crimes against humanity and war crimes in Syria. We
witnessed a veto that denied the recognition of the 1995 Srebrenica massacre as a genocide. We have watched
even the threat of a veto sabotage continued discussions on the atrocity crimes in the DPRK. The hundreds of
thousands that have suffered from atrocities, partly as a result of this inaction, show us the difficulties of fulfilling
our Responsibility to Protect when the veto is wielded in this negligent manner. In this regard, the ICRtoP
strongly urges States to support the “Code of Conduct regarding Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity, or war crimes”, as well as France and Mexico’s political declaration
for a regulation on the use of the veto.

8. Mr. President, extremely important to upholding any of these recommendations on RtoP will be having a
continued forum within the General Assembly to discuss the norm. As such, the ICRtoP urges States to support
the draft resolution on RtoP, which would include RtoP on the General Assembly’s formal agenda. The
adoption of RtoP was a collective achievement within this UN body. Each one of the States here deserves credit
for its adoption; all are affected by the crimes it seeks to prevent; and therefore all have the duty to participate
in General Assembly discussions on the UN’s next decade of implementation. The ICRtoP hopes that all
delegations will use this opportunity to show the same courage and optimism we saw ten years ago at the
World Summit by passing a resolution and recommitting themselves to the norm.

9. In closing, Mr. President, the ICRtoP stands ready as a partner for governments, regional bodies, and the
international community to ensure that, in another ten years, we are not only congratulating ourselves on
building consensus around a norm, but on having built an international community resilient to atrocities