Statement delivered by Iran – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016 [UNOFFICIAL
TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]

Thank you, Mr. Moderator.

I would like to appreciate the Secretary General’s report on the Responsibility to Protect. I extend my
appreciation to the President of the General Assembly for organizing this interactive dialogue. The sad
experiences of the last decades in the Middle East and North Africa, which have highly contributed to the
regeneration and extension of terrorism and extremism in affected countries, and the world as a whole,
exposed the consequences of irresponsible protection.

We note the report of the Secretary General and its recommendations. We agree that the concentration
of the international community should focus on the prevention of mass atrocities, and we support the
strengthening of UN early warning system.

We also maintain that the use of military means to protect populations from atrocity crimes shall be
governed by Security Council decisions. However, authorization of Security Council shall not be
understood as carte blanche. The Security Council should monitor the operations on the ground. It is also
the responsibility of the international community to assist the construction process in post-intervention
era.

Mr. Moderator, it remains a matter of absolute concern that the use of R2P may bring more harm than
good. Meanwhile, in the absence of genuine and unbiased functioning structure, there is persistent
tendency to apply double standards and selective approaches, which grant impunity to favorable ones,
and overlooks atrocities committed by them, no matter how serious and how horrific they are. Selectivity,
double standards and politicization of the concept make it prone to manipulation and abuse, undermine
the integrity of this concept, and gives the impression that the main objective behind R2P is political
agenda or interests rather than saving the lives of people. The objective of R2P shall not be regime change,
but protection of population. This is the major obstacle which preclude R2P to become effective. Member
states should address this deficiency in a serious and objective manner.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of Iran to the United Nations, at the United
Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
25 February 2016
We share the view that even pillar three of Responsibility to Protect does encompass several
measures that do not necessarily call for the use of coercive measures. We also agree that
the concentration of the international community should focus on prevention.

However, since militarism and war are deeply rooted in the political culture of certain powers
who believe in exporting peace through boots, it remains a matter of absolute concern that the
execution of Responsibility to Protect may continue to bring more harm than good. Meanwhile,
in the absence of a genuine and unbiased functioning structure, there is a persistent tendency
towards applying double standards and selective approaches which grants impunity to
favorable ones and overlooks atrocities committed by them no matter how serious and horrific
they are. It’s not history, it’s true even for today’s events.

Selectivity, double standards and the politicization of the concept make it prone to
manipulation and abuse, the question is why Responsibility to Protect should be called to
address one situation but, at the same time, not in other similar situations. The answer is clear:
because of political considerations.

Indeed, it was because of these political considerations that, at the time of the Rwanda
genocide, some Security Council members denied to recognize genocide in Rwanda for a
long period of time. Unfortunately, it is the reality of international order. It’s a major challenge
around this important concept. Selectivity because of political consideration is a reality which
undermines the integrity of this concept and gives the impression that the main objective
behind Responsibility to Protect is a political agenda and political interests.

Selective reference to Responsibility to Protect applicability in similar situations shows that
this concept is attached to political consideration. It is the major obstacle which precludes
Responsibility to Protect from becoming an international norm.

We call on friends of Responsibility to Protect to address this deficiency in a serious and
objective manner before moving towards any action on their resolution in the General
Assembly