Statement delivered by Libya – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]

Sir, I would like to thank Mister Lykketoft, the President of the General Assembly for this interactive
dialogue regarding R2P. I also thank Mr. Ban Ki-Moon for his efforts made tirelessly in order to achieve
the lofty objectives of the UN.

The principle of R2P is one of the important principles adopted by leaders of the world in 2005 because
of the need to develop the UN’s responsibility to deal with threats against the lives of civilians regarding
war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity, as well as others. We hope that the world will be united to
prevent their repetition. Despite all these efforts and after more than ten years, we can say that a little
success was achieved and it has become an integral part of UN peacekeeping operations. But, there are
new challenges because of terrorism, violence, violent extremism, as well as wars involving civilians in
certain countries. The world has witnessed the UN intervention to protect civilians from genocide, war
crimes and ethnic cleansing but we are witnessing the fact that this was not enough.

R2P is an international strategy which should continue after assistance has been provided to help the new
governments to put an end to suffering in their territories and to implement their capacities for peace and
security in order to provide a proper life for their citizens. The international community intervened in
Libya to implement this principle, but the rapid withdrawal as well as the other factors have increased the
crisis in Libya. So, it’s important to implement the R2P provisions and having law prevail together with
the army and police to get to a situation where we can do away with terrorism and restore law.

We urge countries not to use their veto right but rather use mediation and good offices in such cases.

Those who commit mass murders should not enjoy immunity. The international community should help
states in their sovereignty and ensure noninterference in their internal affairs. We hope for positive results
of our dialogue