Statement delivered by Morocco – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016
[TRANSLATION]
Mr. Chair,
Last year, we celebrated two anniversaries: the 70th anniversary of our Organization and the 10th
anniversary of our common commitment to the Responsibility to Protect. During this year, many meetings
and formal and informal discussions were undertaken, so as to take toll of the commitment of our
Organization in preventing conflicts and atrocities.

It is clear that the international community has undertaken a long path in the area of protection, whether
it be in peacekeeping, in respecting and promoting human rights, democracy and the rule of law, or in
preventing atrocities.

However, the international community as a whole, and our Organization in particular, are still far from
achieving their goals. The situation in our world today, with the constant increase of conflicts, calls upon
us to reexamine the obstacles that prevent the full implementation by the international community of its
responsibility to protect the citizens of the world.

If the R2P has received increasing support from the international community over the last few years, many
issues continue to be raised over the best way to operationalize this concept. The issue that is often raised
is how we can ensure protection while avoiding, on one hand, an uncontrolled implementation of the
R2P, and on the other, the manipulation or the political exploitation of its noble objectives.

In this context, my delegation wishes to recall the relation between the three pillars of the R2P, while
emphasizing that States have the primary responsibility to protect their own populations.

My delegation also wishes to reiterate the importance that must be accorded to the prevention in
implementing the R2P.

In this regard, it is crucial to strengthen support to States so as to allow them to strengthen their national
mechanisms for protection of their populations. This notably can be done through strengthening legal
instruments and consolidating democracy and the rule of law. The strengthening of capacities and
technical assistance are indeed the best preventive measures. This will allow for States to create an
environment conducive to protection of their respective populations.

Sir,
My delegation takes note with interest of the Secretary-General’s report which gives a picture of the
decade to come in the area of R2P.

My delegation also takes into account the analysis of the obstacles that are preventing the
implementation of a collection action aiming at preventing and fighting genocide and war crimes, as well
as recommendations made in this regard.

My delegation is particularly interested in paragraph 61 of the report devoted to the “Human Rights Up
Front” initiative.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the irreversible commitment of Morocco to human rights and
fundamental liberties, as has been shown by the legislative and institutional reforms it has undertaken so
as to strengthen the respect of human rights.

We also firmly support the noble objectives of this initiative. However we cannot support an initiative that
has not developed in an intergovernmental approach and for wish our government has not been
associated with or consulted during its development, nor informed of its implementation.

Human rights must be promoted or defended in a transparent manner through dialogue and cooperation.

So as to ensure the success of this initiative, it is essential that it is appropriated by States. As it has been
shown by the successful experience of the Human Rights Council and its Mechanism of Universal Periodic
Review, it is through dialogue, cooperation and appropriation by the States that we can advance humans
rights, democracy and the rule of law.

Sir,
To conclude, my delegation wishes to reaffirm that implementation of the R2P can be fulfilled only
through consolidation of democracy and the rule of law, as well as through the respect of human rights
and individual and collective liberties. This is why we must strengthen our efforts in these areas in the
context of dialogue and cooperation.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco to the United
Nations, at the United Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion "From
commitment to implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened
by the President of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
25 February 2016
The 2005 was a key moment for the concept of Responsibility to Protect, it reflected the
commitment of States to respond to crisis situations in order to protect populations from the
clearly defined crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

The summit defined the scope of application of Responsibility to Protect and limited the case
to where a State is unable or unwilling to protect its population against the most serious crimes.

In this regards, Morocco reaffirms its commitment to paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
WSOD, which affirms that each individual State has the responsibility to protect its populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

As we are celebrating the 10th anniversary of Responsibility to Protect, this concept has taken
a new dimension in the light of recent developments in the world. If the concept gained wider
support within the international community during the last years, it nonetheless continues to
raise questions on the best way and means of its implementation to avoid an uncontrolled
implementation and any possible instrumentalization or political exploitation of its novel
objectives, this was the work of the Marrakech conference.

Morocco would like to, in this regard, reiterate the intersect relationship between the 3 pillars
of the Responsibility to Protect which are the responsibilities of the State to protect,
international assistance and capacity building and timely and decisive response. Aware of the
importance of prevention in the implementation of the Responsibility to Protect, the Kingdom
of Morocco would like to stress that State sovereignty implies its primary responsibility to
protect its own populations.

In this respect, it is crucial the support to States in order to allow them to reinforce their national
mechanisms, legal protection of the populations through strengthened legal instruments and
the consolidation of democracy and the rule of law. Capacity building and technical assistance
are, indeed, the best preventative measures which enable States to create an enabling
environment to protect their respective populations, this was one of the most important
recommendations of the Marrakech conference.

Morocco recalls the establishment, during the 2005 World Summit, of a consensual
formulation of the concept of Responsibility to Protect which makes it clear that this
responsibility must be exercised, first of all, by non-coercive measures such as the use of
diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful means and that it is only in cases where all these
attempts are insufficient that coercive measures should be considered as a last resort while
strictly complying with the UN Charter and respecting the strict and non-selective rules of
international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco underlines that the full implementation of the
Responsibility to Protect can only be achieved through the consolidation of democracy, the
rule of law as well as the respect for human rights and individual and collective freedoms