{Please check against delivery}
DRAFT STATEMENT

BY

EMMANUEL KAYODE OJO, fdc
MINISTER/R2P
PERMANENT MISSION OF NIGERIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

AT THE

INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT: MOBILIZING COLLECTIVE
ACTION: THE NEXT DECADE FOR THE RESPONSIBILITY TO
PROTECT

NEW YORK, 6TH SEPTEMBER 2016

Mr. Moderator,
The Nigerian delegation aligns with the statement of the Group of Friends
and welcomes the Secretary-General's 8th Report on the Responsibility to
Protect themed; Mobilizing collective action: The next decade for
the Responsibility to Protect. The Report which is a follow up to the
2015 report provides a vision for collective action to implement R2P amid
an impending leadership change at the UN.

Mr. Moderator,
R2P is based on international humanitarian and human rights law and
represents a global conceptual and policy shift in the notion of sovereignty
and security. Suffice to say that R2P was endorsed by member states
during the World Summit in 2005 to prevent and respond to Genocide, War
crimes, Ethnic cleansing and Crimes against humanity; recent experiences
in Cote d'Ivoire, Libya, Ukraine and Syria conveyed clear lessons that the
cooperation of, and among, member states is critically essential to the
successful operationalisation of the Responsibility to Protect. Today's
dialogue therefore is timely for member states to rededicate their efforts
towards the actualisation and implementation of the vision as conceived in
2005.

Africa initiated the principle of R2P through article 4(H) of the African
Union Constitutive Act. It's implementation in the region was established
with the signature of the ECOWAS Protocol on Mutual Defense Assistance
signed on 29th May 1981, in Sierra Leone and the interventions led by
Nigeria through the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Liberia in
1990, which helped stop the carnage in those countries. Nigeria used this
instrument to support peaceful resolution of conflicts in various countries in
Africa, especially in the West African sub-region.

Mr. Moderator,
As highlighted in the Regional Forum on the Responsibility to Protect which
was held in Nigeria in June 2012, it is necessary to intensify efforts towards

clarifying the concept of R2P as a result of the perceived reluctance of
member states to subscribe to the principle's operationalisation, which is
enshrouded in scepticism. The efforts of the Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect as the Secretariat of the Global Network
of Focal Points, in championing the cause of the principle through
the recommendation of strategies to encourage political will and
cooperation among Member states, is highly commendable. It is
important for Member states to support those efforts by
subscribing to R2P. Nigeria recently became the 53rd Focal Point of R2P.

This is an expression of the support of my country to the principle. It is of
necessity for more member states to appoint Focal Points so as to
facilitate and accelerate the full understanding and acceptance of
the principle.

Mr. Moderator,
Nigeria suggested during the 2015 Focal Points meeting in Madrid, that
Member states should consider the appointment of regional Focal Points.

Nigeria believes that in the next decade of the R2P, such a strategy will
facilitate and fast-track the understanding and acceptance of the principle.

Nigeria remains determined to work in concert with other stakeholders in
ensuring a more effective operationalisation of the R2P.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of Nigeria to the United Nations, at the United
Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
25 February 2016
Nigeria notes that, 10 years after the adoption of the WSOD, It is critical that the General
Assembly pronounce itself on Responsibility to Protect by adopting since a resolution was
adopted in 2009. Given ongoing atrocities around the world, including terrorist actions by
NSAs, as indicated by Edward Luck, it is important for member States to reaffirm their core
commitment reached at the 2005 World Summit.

Nigeria welcomes the draft resolution on the Responsibility to Protect and affirms support for
its balanced nature and focus on strengthening national capacities for prevention, as
highlighted by Jennifer Welsh, this is the core of the Responsibility to Protect.

We also call on the General Assembly to adopt the draft resolution by consensus in the first
half of 2016. Nigeria sees this as an opportunity to reaffirm the importance of Geneva based
institutions and mechanisms, such as the HRC and the OHCHR in moving forward the
Responsibility to Protect agenda. We also stress the essence of the UPR processes and
special procedures mandate order and early warning for the prevention of mass atrocity
crimes. In this regard, we note the importance of the links between Geneva and New York.

We also support the work of the UN Secretariat regarding the ‘Human Rights up Front’ action
plan and system wide efforts put in place to improve the capacity in preventing and responding
to serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law including those that
lead to mass atrocity crimes.

The original policy forum on Responsibility to Protect, held in Abuja, Nigeria, from 11 to 12
June 2012, highlighted, among other issues, strategies to encourage political will and
cooperation among member States regarding Responsibility to Protect and the need for
effective national and regional mechanisms for dealing with perpetrators of mass atrocities.

Relevant here, is the endorsement of the SG for the appointment of Responsibility to Protect
Focal Points as tangible demonstration of commitment to the prevention of mass atrocity
crimes. We therefore encourage all member States and regional organizations to become part
of this growing global network as Nigeria reaffirms its commitment to the Responsibility to
Protect and the need to prioritize the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, as contained in paragraphs 138 and 138 of the 2005 WSOD.

In conclusion, we call on all member of the Security Council not to vote against or block
credible action aimed at preventing mass atrocity crimes. We support the ACT group’s Code
of Conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against humanity or
war crimes which has received 110 signatures of support, to date, as well as the FrenchMexican initiative on voluntary restraint on the use of the veto in mass atrocity situations.

In addition, we express strong support for the work of the Special Advisor on the Prevention
of Genocide and Responsibility to Protect and reaffirm the importance of the framework of
analysis for atrocity crimes.

Finally, Nigeria joins others in supporting the inclusion of Responsibility to Protect on the
formal agenda of the 71st session of the General Assembly