UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect on the
situation in Aleppo, Syrian Arab Republic
(New York, 02 December 2016) The Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, Ivan Šimonović, expressed outrage at the dire situation of civilians
who are trapped in the fighting in Aleppo.

“Civilians are being killed in besieged east Aleppo on a daily basis and tens of thousands of them
are attempting to flee the area due to intensified ground fighting and indiscriminate attacks by
Syrian Government forces and their allies. This is inhumane and should be stop immediately.”
The Special Advisers expressed alarm that trapped civilians have only two deadly options to
choose from: either to stay in east Aleppo and be subjected to indiscriminate bombardments and
starvation, or flee and face the risk of being killed during their attempt to leave eastern Aleppo
and the risk of being arrested and detained once they reach government or Kurdish-controlled
areas. “There must be accountability for potential crimes committed”, the Special Advisers
emphasized, “but no retaliation. That requires respect for due process of law, and not arbitrary
detention, torture and extra judiciary killings.” Civilians in western Aleppo have also been
subjected to indiscriminate shelling by armed groups, resulting in the death of dozens of people
and the displacement of tens of thousands.

The situation of these children, women and men is desperate and cannot be tolerated. This is an
emergency situation and warrants emergency action. As first measures, the Special Advisers
reiterate the call for a pause in fighting and the creation of safe corridors for the delivery of
humanitarian aid to those in need. They called on all parties to the conflict to abide by their
obligations under international human rights and humanitarian law and refrain from targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructures.

“The lives of hundreds of thousands of civilians are at stake. We cannot afford to wait any longer
if we do not want to be the witnesses of what could be one of the biggest mass killing of civilians
in our time. Aleppo has become the symbol of the failure of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
international community to protect populations in Syria.”
The protection of the populations of Syria is the primary responsibility of the Syrian State.

However, in the face of the State’s abject failure to protect its populations, the international
community has the responsibility to take timely and decisive measures to protect populations in
Syria. The Special Advisers reminded the United Nations Security Council and General
Assembly that they have a special responsibility, in that regard.

Diplomatic, financial and military support from external actors has fanned the flames of the
conflict. The Special Advisers urged all actors with influence in the conflict to use it today in
order to stop fighting and save lives. “Why do Syrian civilians have to pay the price of external
interests in Syria? We must act now. No one can claim that they did not know what was
happening. It is time to uphold our commitment to ‘never again’.”

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Sarah Jacquier Nobel, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212-963-3574; Email: jacquier@un.org.

25 November 2016

Note to Correspondents: Statement by
Adama Dieng, UN Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide on the situation in
the Central African Republic
(New York, 25 November 2016) The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Adama Dieng expressed deep concern over a new outbreak of violence in the Central African
Republic, in which civilians are being targeted based on their ethnicity or religion. Since 21
November 2016, some 85 civilians have reportedly been killed, 76 wounded and nearly 11,000
persons have been displaced from the town of Bria, Haute Kotto prefecture, as a result of clashes
between two armed groups, the Front Populaire pour la Renaissance de la Centrafrique (FPRC) and
the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC).

The FPRC reportedly singled out ethnic Fulani in the town of Bria, carrying out house-to-house
searches, killing, looting and abducting residents. The FPRC also occupied hospital buildings,
preventing wounded Fulani from receiving medical treatment.

Peacekeepers deployed by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to Bria later took control of the hospital and reinforced
measures to protect civilians. The United Nations Secretary-General’s Representative in the Central
African Republic travelled to Bria on 24 November with representatives of the United Nations
Country Team, the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African States and called
for an immediate end to the violence.

Clashes between opposing factions of the ex-Seleka armed group were also reported in Bambari,
Ouaka prefecture. The Secretary-General’s Deputy Representative in the Central African Republic,
who went to Bambari on 25 November with the United States and the African Union ambassadors,
called an immediate cessation of hostilities.

The Special Adviser condemned this new outbreak of violence and the risk that it could result in
reprisal attacks and rapidly escalate. “Given the country’s recent history, this kind of targeted
violence is extremely dangerous and must be stopped”, he said.

The Special Adviser reminds the Government of the Central African Republic of its responsibility to
protect its populations, whatever their ethnicity or political affiliation. He called for an immediate end
to the hostilities and urged the national authorities to take urgent measures to protect the population
from further violence.

Stressing the importance of the fight against impunity in the Central African Republic, Special
Adviser Dieng calls for full investigations into these allegations of targeted killings to ensure that
those responsible are held accountable. He stressed that “If carried out in a widespread or
systematic manner, such acts could constitute crimes under international law that can be prosecuted
before national or international courts.”
The Special Adviser welcomes progress towards the establishment of the Special Criminal Court in
the Central African Republic, which will investigate serious violations of international humanitarian
law committed in the territory of the Central African Republic, including genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity since 2003.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Martine Nouma
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917-367-4961 Email: nouma@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
on the situation in northern Rakhine State, Myanmar
(New York, 29 November 2016) The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, expressed alarm at reports of the deteriorating security, human rights
and humanitarian situation in northern Rakhine State, Myanmar. Following attacks by armed
assailants against border security posts in October 2016, the response of the military has
reportedly been characterized by excessive use of force and other serious human rights violations
against civilian population, particularly the Rohingya Muslim population, including allegations
of extrajudicial executions, torture, rape and the destruction of religious property. “These
allegations must be verified as a matter of urgency”, stated Adama Dieng. “If they are true, the
lives of thousands of people are at risk. The reputation of Myanmar, its new Government and its
military forces is also at stake in this matter.”
The Special Adviser stressed that “the current restrictions on access to northern Rakhine State,
which prevent verification of the allegations, are contributing to suspicion and alarm. Denying
the allegations without allowing for their verification is counterproductive.” Mr. Dieng urged the
Myanmar Government and the military to heed requests by the United Nations - and many others
around the world - to authorise access and an immediate and thorough independent investigation
into incidents reported in northern Rakhine state since October 2016. “If the allegations are
found to be true, the Government must take immediate steps to stop them, prevent further
violations and remedy the situation. Those found responsible for human rights violations must be
punished. Failure to do so will only increase the risk of very serious international crimes that
Myanmar has an obligation to prevent and punish under international law.”
Adama Dieng reminded the new Government of Myanmar of the trust placed in the Government
by the international community as Myanmar transitions to democracy, noting that there have
been significant steps forward in that regard. However, the Special Adviser underlined that
“Myanmar needs to demonstrate its commitment to the rule of law and to the human rights of all
its populations. It cannot expect that such serious allegations are ignored or go unscrutinised.

Wherever and whenever these types of allegations are reported in the world, it is the duty of the
international community to remind States of their responsibilities to their populations and their
obligations under international law. Myanmar is no exception.”
Adama Dieng also took the opportunity to urge the Government of Bangladesh not to close its
borders to refugees fleeing Myanmar. “Closing the border, deporting refugees or failing to
provide assistance, exposes these populations to further violence that could, in the worst case,
constitute international crimes”, the Special Adviser warned.

Adama Dieng concluded by saying that “the current violence did not come out of thin air. It is
taking place against a background of very deeply rooted discrimination against specific sectors
of the population and a failure to put in place conditions that would support peaceful coexistence
among the different communities in Rakhine State. The Government needs, for once and for all,

to find a sustainable solution to the situation of the Rohingya Muslims and other religious and
ethnic minorities in Myanmar, a solution that is in full compliance with the international human
rights standards that the Government has pledged to respect”.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Claudia Diaz, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917-367-2061; Email: diazc@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

Statement to the Security Council
by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, on his
visit to South Sudan
New York, 17 November 2016

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Thank you for the invitation to brief the Security Council on my visit to South Sudan last week.

I decided to go to South Sudan due to growing concern at recent developments there, including
reports of violence targeting multiple ethnic groups. This violence is taking place against the
background of the breakdown in the political process and a stalling in the implementation of the
peace agreement.

The aim of my visit was to carry out an assessment of the situation from the perspective of my
mandate in order to better understand the landscape of ethnically-fuelled violence – including
hate speech and incitement to violence – and the risk that this violence could lead to further
atrocity crimes, including genocide.

In the course of the week I met with United Nations colleagues, senior government officials,
civil society groups, religious leaders, community members and diplomatic representatives in
Juba. I visited a “protection of civilians” site in Juba and travelled to Yei town in Yei River
State to meet with members of the community and government. Yei, which until recently had
been spared the violence seen in other areas, has now been identified as a conflict “hot spot” with
escalating violence against multiple tribal groups in Yei and in the Central Equatorian State, of
which Yei River State is a part. The perpetrators of this violence are varied and reportedly
include the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), the SPLA in Opposition, unidentified
armed groups, militia, armed groups and bandits.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank SRSG Løj for the excellent support provided by
UNMISS for my visit and express my appreciation to the Transitional Government of National
Unity for facilitating the visit and for its cooperation while I was there.

That being said, as I reported last week, I was dismayed that what I saw and heard in South
Sudan confirmed my concerns that there is a strong risk of violence escalating along ethnic lines,
with the potential for genocide. I do not say that lightly. As the Secretary-General highlighted in
his report, there are a myriad of underlying risk factors, which in my assessment provide an
environment ripe for the commission of mass atrocities.

First, in addition to the loss of life and trauma, the violence has an ever-increasing economic
cost, both domestically and internationally. It is causing a drain on much-needed resources for
development and humanitarian assistance. The Government is reportedly half of the national
budget on security. There will be neither growth nor development in South Sudan if it continues.

The economy has stagnated, inflation is very high and the population is becoming increasingly
desperate.

The political and security crisis that resulted from the July 2016 violence was fresh in the minds
of those with whom I spoke, and many referred to the potential for a further deterioration of the
security situation in the coming dry season, when movement around the country would be easier.

Reports from the field indicate continual security incidents and the arming, recruitment and
training of both the SPLA and SPLA/IO.

As the Security Council has noted, we have seen patterns of human rights violations and abuses
committed mainly by SPLA soldiers, police officers and members of the National Security
Service, as well as by SPLA/IO and militia groups. These violations have not been addressed.

There has been widespread impunity and lack of accountability for violations, including those
committed in the name of counter-insurgency. Civil society organizations have been directly
targeted, as have human rights defenders and journalists. Some have been killed and many others
have fled the country out of fear for their safety.

Many people with whom I spoke referred to an amorphous and undisciplined army that was
formed out of what had once been two opposing forces. They have now splintered into multiple
armed groups, criminal gangs and bandits, over which the Government is failing to exercise
control. Some of these groups are formed along ethnic lines, and pursuing their own objectives.

In speaking to people, I heard of tremendous mistrust between the civilian population and the
military. The population no longer seems to view the military as their protector, but rather as an
entity to be feared – or to be joined as one of the few potential employers. One elder I met
summed up the current ethnic polarization: he said that he could see fear in the eyes of some, and
enthusiasm in the eyes of others.

There is a serious and protracted humanitarian crisis and widespread, prolonged displacement of
populations – both internally and to neighbouring countries. In some cases displacement has
caused the disruption of agricultural activities and food insecurity.

Despite this crisis, the Government and non-State armed groups continues to hinder access by
the humanitarian and human rights community. While aid agencies continue to deliver assistance
to people in need across the country, at times there is outright obstruction of the delivery of
services and support to people in need.

The scarcity of resources has contributed to divisions within society. Instead of the development
of a South Sudanese national identity, we are seeing extreme polarization of some ethnic groups,
which has increased in certain places since the outbreak of violence in July this year and the
disintegration of the peace process. Some groups shared with me their feelings of betrayal, and a
perception that the SPLA is increasingly ethnically homogenous, composed mostly of Dinka
2

members, and has been “ethnicized” as part of a wider plan to launch systematic attacks against
ethnic Nuer and multiple tribal groups which make up the Equatorias. At the same time, there
were a number of incidents last month that specifically targeted Dinkas.

Inflammatory rhetoric, stereotyping and name calling have been accompanied by threats,
targeted killings and rape of members of particular ethnic groups, and by violent attacks against
individuals or communities on the basis of their perceived political affiliation. Especially
worrying was a statement issued by President Kiir on 19 October in which he said he would
personally lead military operations against the armed groups responsible for killings in the
Equatorias.

I visited Yei River State, and I was shocked by what I found. Yei had previously been spared the
violence seen elsewhere but has suffered the consequences of the July violence, when the SPLA
pursued Riek Machar and his supporters through the Equatorias into the Democratic Republic of
Congo.

Recent reports detail the expulsion of farmers from their land into Yei town. UNHCR reported
that 100,000 people were trapped in Yei at the end of September. Many farmers have lost their
homes and belongings, livestock and land. Property has been looted and villages have been
burned. I heard reports of targeted killings, assault, maiming, mutilation, rape, and the barbarous
use of machetes to hack families to death.

When I visited, there was widespread fear among the population. One person told me in
desperation, “Tonight I don’t know what will happen to me.” An elder expressed terror that his
community would be “finished.” And Yei is just one location among many that are experiencing
this kind of violence. Despite the challenges it faces, the United Nations system has been
monitoring signs of increased conflict potential in other areas of Central Equatorian State, as
well as those in Western and Eastern Equatorian States, Western Bahr El Ghazal, Upper Nile,
Unity, and Jonglei. However, there is much that we do not know.

The media, including social media, are being used to spread hatred and encourage ethnic
polarization, and letters threatening particular ethnic groups, telling them to leave, face violence
or be eliminated from specific areas, have surfaced in the last month. I am particularly worried
by the involvement of the youth, who make up a large percentage of the population and who are
particularly susceptible to divisions within society. I was also informed by a number of people
that the South Sudanese diaspora has been playing an influential, at times negative, role in
spreading hatred and inciting violence.

There is a range of different perpetrators and victims, which makes an assessment of the risk of
atrocity crimes in South Sudan more complex. But the warning signs are there. Throughout my
visit, conversations with all actors confirmed that what began as a political conflict has
transformed into what could become an outright ethnic war. With the stalling of the
implementation of the peace agreement; the current, worsening, humanitarian crisis; a stagnating
economy and the proliferation of arms, all of the ingredients exist for a dangerous escalation of
violence. There is both motivation and the means.

I must emphasize that genocide is a process. It does not happen overnight. And because it is a
process and one that takes time to prepare, it can be prevented. The political leadership of South
Sudan has the primary responsibility to protect its populations and must be held to this
responsibility. Action can and must be taken now to address some of the factors that could
provide fertile ground for genocide.

My intention in briefing you is to provide impetus for preventive action. We have a collective
responsibility to protect populations in South Sudan from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity.

Bearing this in mind, it is highly desirable that the Security Council consider the following
options which, if implemented could reduce the risk of atrocity crimes:
-

First, while I commend the Security Council for your strong condemnation of ethnicallyfueled violence and hate speech, the Council should continue to insist on preventing further
incitement to discrimination, hostility, and hatred that could lead to more violence.

-

The Security Council could publicly call for the political leadership of South Sudan to
immediately condemn and take steps to prevent any act of discrimination, hostility, and
hatred that could constitute incitement to violence.

-

The Security Council could specifically request that UNMISS monitor, investigate and report
on all incidents of hate speech and incitement to violence, and be provided full access by the
Government of South Sudan to do so.

-

All support should be given to UNMISS to carry out all the Mission’s mandated tasks, in
particularly tasks that relate to the protection of civilians and human rights monitoring, which
could contribute to preventing future violence. The Government should be pressed to ensure
that freedom of movement is granted to all United Nations personnel, both civilians and
military, to conduct patrols, investigate and report on incidents, and conduct community
based conflict prevention and resolution initiatives.

-

The Security Council could consider requesting the Panel of Experts on South Sudan to
investigate and report on the individuals who are inciting violence, responsible for targeted
ethnic killings, and propagating hate speech, as well as incitement to violence by the
diaspora.

-

Given the current scenario, it is urgent that the Security Council impose an arms embargo.

The proliferation of arms is devastating and this could have an important impact.

-

Similarly, the sanctions regime should not be limited to a few individuals; freezing of assets
and restrictions of movement of offenders should be imposed more widely. South Sudan’s
top officials have benefited both financially and politically from the war, and could not
maintain the status quo without the free flow of funds and arms into the country. There is a
known system of international banks, businesses, weapons traders, and intermediaries which
has contributed to the perpetuation to the conflict through their dealings, and the Security
Council has the power to influence this system.

4

-

The Security Council should continue to stress the importance of an inclusive political
process accompanied by a cessation of hostilities. If some sectors of the population continue
to feel excluded from participation, there is little incentive for them to pursue peace.

-

Until the formal peace process is reinstated, there is much that can be done in terms of
facilitating dialogue. What surfaced over and over in my discussions last week was the
presence of long-standing anger, combined with misconceptions and preconceived notions.

These need to be addressed if there is to be a chance of peace. All the actors with whom I
met stressed that there was an urgent need to engage in both community and national level
dialogue and I was encouraged by their eagerness to engage in such processes. Community
and religious leaders, provincial level authorities, and UNMISS colleagues shared
experiences of efforts to promote communication. These efforts should be supported by the
international community. Once there is greater stability and redoubling of efforts for
dialogue, I urge the establishment of the commission truth, healing and reconciliation by the
Government foreseen in the peace agreement.

-

Beyond reconciliation, justice and accountability were common themes in my discussions
with the people of South Sudan. Even as the conflict becomes more complex, the effects of
the December 2013 outbreak of violence and subsequent violence linger, and human rights
violations committed during the last few years have not been adequately documented or
accounted for. I welcome the commitment of the signatories of the peace agreement to
establish a hybrid court to prosecute cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, as well as well as other serious crimes under international law.

-

I hope that the Council’s discussions with national authorities and with the African Union
may move these plans forward. In the interim, I urge the Security Council to call for the
establishment of an investigation mechanism that would collect and preserve evidence that
could later provide evidence to national or international courts. This would help in assessing
the full scale of violations and track patterns in violence.

-

Finally, while the State has the primary responsibility to protect its populations, other States,
regional organisations and the international community can assist its protection efforts.

Indeed, neighbouring countries have an intrinsic interest in doing so. The involvement of
neighbouring countries in domestic conflicts with resulting spill-over beyond national
borders has occurred in Democratic Republic of Congo and Somalia, to name a few.

-

Regional action needs to be reinvigorated. African leaders must coalesce around a unified
strategy to prevent an escalation of violence. Given the different regional interests and
allegiances of the political leadership in South Sudan, any political strategy must be endorsed
by all national actors if it is to succeed. The Security Council should strengthen its
cooperation with the African Union Peace and Security Council and relevant actors within
IGAD in order to move this process forward.

Last week, I saw all the signs that ethnic hatred and targeting of civilians could evolve into
genocide if something is not done now to stop it. I urge the Security Council and Members
States of the region to be united, and to take action. Thank you.

UNITED
NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, on the situation in and around Mosul (Iraq)
(New York, 1 November 2016) The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, condemns in the strongest terms the continued,
absolute disregard for international human rights and international humanitarian law by the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), demonstrated most recently by ISIL’s actions in
the context of ongoing military operations in and around Mosul.

Recent reports cite the abduction and execution by ISIL of large numbers of civilians, the use
of civilians as human shields and incitement to violence by ISIL’s leaders. There have also
been reports of use of chemical weapons and collective punishment of members of Iraqi
Security Forces and their relatives.

On 31 October, according to local reports, ISIL attempted to forcefully transfer as many as
25,000 people from the town of Hamam al-Alil to Talafar District, Mosul District and
Abusaif town, the location of a military base where ISIL has reportedly carried out mass
killings of civilians. The Special Adviser expresses grave concern for the safety of these
civilians and the tens of thousands of others who have reportedly been forcibly relocated to
be used as human shields. ISIL is likely to increase such tactics as the military operation
progresses.

The Special Adviser stresses the importance of accountability for crimes committed by ISIL,
noting that existing allegations are sufficiently strong for action to be taken immediately. He
reiterates his call for all evidence of criminal activity to be properly documented and secured
for future consideration by a court of justice.

He also reminds the Government of Iraq that its military operations must be conducted with
full respect for international law and that all allegations of retaliatory violence by the security
forces or by armed militias associated with them should be addressed effectively and without
delay. “Under international law, command responsibility means that those in authority will be
held accountable for the actions of forces under their control.”
Special Adviser Dieng also expresses his concern at the increasing risk that armed groups
acting on behalf of ethnic and religious communities could carry out retaliatory violence
against members of the Sunni community. “Any kind of retaliatory violence against
individuals on the basis of their membership of a specific group is unacceptable and will
undermine the legitimate calls of these communities for their own protection and for their
long-standing grievances to be addressed.”
The Special Adviser acknowledges statements by the Government and by religious
authorities calling for the protection of civilians. He expresses his strong support for ongoing
humanitarian efforts and reiterates the right of all displaced persons to return to their places

of origin in dignity and safety. He encourages those in leadership positions to actively work
to repair the existing rift among and within communities “Iraq is facing challenges that, if
adequately addressed, provide an opportunity to plant the seeds for future peace. It is
imperative that all Iraqi and international actors make their contribution to this just and
critical effort today.”
*** *

For media queries please contact:
Mario Buil-Merce
Political Affairs Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917 367 5001
Email: buil-merce@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide expresses alarm at
public comments by Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte
(New York, 30 September 2016) The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Adama Dieng, expressed alarm at public comments by President Rodrigo Duterte of the
Philippines, in which he reinforced a campaign to kill millions of drug addicts in the
Philippines and compared it to the massacre of millions of Jews by Hitler during the
Holocaust in Nazi Germany during World War II.

Adama Dieng qualified such a statement as deeply disrespectful of the right to life of all
human beings. He reminded that the Holocaust was one of the darkest periods of the
history of humankind and that any glorification of the cruel and criminal acts committed
by those responsible was unacceptable and offensive. He added that such statement was
also undermining the efforts of the international community to develop strategies to
prevent the recurrence of those crimes, to which all countries around the world should be
committed to.

The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide called upon President Rodrigo
Duterte to exercise restraint in the use of language that could exacerbate discrimination,
hostility and violence and encourage the commission of criminal acts which, if
widespread or systematic, could amount to crimes against humanity. He also requested
the President of the Philippines to support the investigation of the reported rise of killings
in the context of the anti-crime and anti-drug campaign targeting drug dealers and users
to ascertain the circumstances of each death.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Claudia Diaz, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917-367-2061; Email: diazc@un.org.

Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect
UN the general meeting 7

Statement by Mr. Adama Dieng
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General for the Prevention of Genocide

New York, September 6, 2016

Mister President,

Mr. Deputy Secretary-General,
Excellencies and delegates,

Ladies and gentlemen,

Introduction

If, in the early twenty-first century, no country can impose its lasting dictatorship by
weapons on its civilian population, it is also clear that no country, whatever its
power, can not, in itself, come to the aid of those in distress, 4 less
lead a liberation war by proxy. Those days seem gone. But it |
however, that is still the death toll in suffering, in misery for
civilians remains unbearable.

She has the right instrument to achieve this?

Yes, but it is not yet finished and shared: This is the "Responsibility to Protect"
(R2P) "peaceful weapon," including the United Nations equip themselves, 6O years after their creation,
when Ja nature of armed conflict has changed from inter-state confrontations
4 internal rifts.

My contribution to the debate today is simple, which is 4 remind your
Remember some of the main points of the 2016 report on the responsibility of
protect the particular aim of food for thought, is undoubtedly rich, who
will follow in the informal interactive dialogue.

As you know, this year's report is based on the findings of the report
Previous and aims to assess the progress on the principle of responsibility
protect, ten years after its adoption at the 2005 World Summit.

This year, the Secretary-General invites us 4 even further reflection on
various obstacles to greater mobilization of collective action to
prevent and respond to genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against I'humanité. Our duty today is therefore in the context of
find effective ways to overcome these obstacles. :

A more difficult situation

The report establishes a link between I'augmentation the frequency and magnitude of
criminal atrocities and decreased respect for international humanitarian law. A
parallel is established between the increase in criminal atrocities and other
Key issues on the international agenda including the global crisis
forced displacement.

In the current difficult environment, it is more important than ever to protect
populations. The report calls the unit has not only face situations ot a
Quick and decisive action is required, but also - and especially - the beginnings of a dice
crisis.

In the view of the Secretary-General, political divisions prevent decisive action. By
Therefore, the search unit is an essential element for Implementation of
the responsibility to protect.

It is our duty to reflect and realize our political commitments

There is no doubt that other factors influence for Implementation of
responsibility to protect, which also were raised during the seven dialogues
interactive prior to the General Assembly on the Responsibility to Protect.

First, some Member States still questioning the relationship between the three
pillars, wondering if they should operate sequential manner within
for Implementation of the responsibility to protect. The report emphasizes that the pillars
not congus to operate sequential manner, but said that the use
some preventive tools or reagents must follow a sequential logic. By
Therefore, the use of military force should be the last resort.

Second, Member States requested clarification regarding
Basic components for industrial action in response
situations ot the States obviously can not protect their populations
against criminal atrocities. The report puts forward several proposals
focus on strengthening early warning mechanisms to ensure that 4
credible information provided by impartial actors, can reach the appropriate decision-making bodies within the United Nations and
elsewhere.

It is clear that the conceptual issues should not impede the setting 4
ceuvre of the responsibility to protect, given the number of situations in the world
ot populations at high risk of crimes and atrocities. We have
not that luxury. We must continue to take collective action to respond to
political commitment adopted by member states in 2005, and when it will ot
necessary.

However, we must not ignore the conceptual issues. The dialogues
periodicals, such as the one we are having today, contribute to reducing manner
considerable differences and 4 put on the table the challenges and opportunities
surround for Implementation of the principle of protection. I think it would be desirable to
find other opportunities to discuss these dialogues, both formal way or
informal.

Obstacles 4 implementation

The report refers to three types of developments that threaten to widen
the gap between the commitments of Member States and the reality which people
vulnerable face. First, we are witnessing an alarming 4 unprincipled
fundamentals of international law. Deuxigmement, Member States have not
sufficiently translated their commitments regarding crime prevention
atrocity since concrete prevention strategies do not exist in some
frames. Troisitmement, we note with concern the increasing Rele actors
External that amplify the commission of criminal atrocities.

A vision for collective action

To enforce the commitment of States policy to take action
collective, the Secretary-General encourages the implementation of existing measures
four fronts.

First, it is necessary to continue 4 develop and coordinate strategies
4 preventive manner make them more effective. Although it has been said several
times, we still need to improve efforts to collect and
analyze relevant information. Much effort has been devoted
improving technical elements relating to the collection of information. Nevertheless, we must strengthen our capacity to share sensitive information that could
lead to effective preventive action.

Furthermore, effective prevention may require changing some practices
job. We must adopt adequate measures to ensure that 4 threads
on specific situations of concern focus more on
The identification of strategic options to address risks. It could
encourage rapid action to protect populations.

The development of effective prevention strategies also requires the identification of
areas of complementarity with other key programs of action, including
prevention of violent extremism. When we look at the conditions in the
spread of violent extremism, we examine several of the risk factors
criminal atrocities.

Second, we simply need to be prepared to provide a response
Quick and decisive. Each member of the international community that
responsibility, which can lead to different responses, 4 levels, it
either bilaterally or through the frame 4 regional organizations
International. This goes along with the need to increase investment in
wide range of tools peaceful 4 us. On this front, it is necessary
1a to increase coordination with regional actors and civil society to
promote an appropriate response.

At the Security Council, the report calls for Council members to
leadership by accepting a certain restraint in the use of the veto
in situations involving heinous crimes.

Thirdly, we all know about the close link between prevention and recurrence.

As the Deputy Secretary-General us | has reminded, too many countries that are
4 now face a risk of generalized violence and systematic | 'lived
before. The report encourages the provision of targeted support to national authorities
located in such recurrence of situations, including 4 through
investments in transitional justice initiatives. I have in mind the process
reconciliation.

Finally, he encouraged a renewed institutional capacity to
overcome all these obstacles. At the UN, we are committed to redouble 4
our efforts to integrate the responsibility to protect any situation that requires its
consideration. We are also committed to persevere in our efforts to revitalize and processing to make the organization fit to meet the challenges of
protection. At the national and regional levels, the report recognizes the importance of
global and regional networks and the national capacity building dedicated form
focal points for Tesponsabilité protect.

The report contains a list of steps Suggestive to strengthen the capacity of
regional organizations to work with the UN and with other actors on
means prevention and response to criminal atrocities

Conclusion

The report concludes with a call to each member of the international community
Tenouveler commitment was the tool of responsibility to protect. This requires that we
dénoricions genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against I'humanité when committed or about to be committed. this requires
also that we give priority to the protection of vulnerable populations au
beyond the political -_étroits _intéréts when many same legitimate.

We must also redouble our efforts to overcome political divisions. It is
vital to invest in strengthening concrete prevention and response capabilities
quick. Finally, we must follow Vappel the Secretary-General for strengthening the
political leadership to make the responsibility to protect a living reality. I
sincerely think that all the points mentioned in this speech are dependent
of the latter,

Thank you..

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide on the situation in Burundi
(New York, 24 August 2016) The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, expressed his concern at inflammatory statements by public
officials that could constitute incitement to violence including, most recently, by a senior
official of the ruling CNDD-FDD political party.

In a statement on 16 August 2016 that was published on the CNDD-FDD website, Pascal
Nyabenda, who was at the time President of the CNDD-FDD party and President of the
National Assembly, suggested that the genocide in Rwanda was a fabrication of the
international community, (“montages genocidaires contre le Gouvernement dit Hutu de
Kigali”) that was used to remove the Hutu government that was in place at the time.

“This irresponsible statement could be interpreted as genocide denial”, Mr. Dieng said, “and
has the potential to inflame ethnic tensions, both within Burundi and outside its borders”. At
the 20 August meeting of the party, a new head of the CNDD-FDD was appointed but Mr.

Nyabenda continues in his role as President of the National Assembly.

The situation in Burundi continues to be marred by instability and reports of serious human
rights violations, including allegations of extra-judicial killings, disappearances, torture, and
arbitrary detention of members of the opposition, civil society and those suspected of
opposing the Government. Human rights defenders and journalists are among the hundreds of
thousands of people who have fled the country since April 2015.

In its concluding observations, issued on 11 August 2016 following a special report submitted
at the request of the United Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT), the Committee’s
international experts expressed deep concern over the hundreds of reports of torture received
and called for investigations into all cases of killings, enforced disappearances and other
violence motivated by the ethnic origin of the victim. The Committee urged the Burundian
Government to refrain from making any public statements that could exacerbate ethnic
tensions or incite violence or hatred and to ensure that public and law enforcement officials
do not accept or tolerate such acts by other groups.

Special Adviser Dieng also raised concern that the youth wing of the CNDD-FDD party,
known as the Imbonerakure, continues to be associated with human rights abuses and is
reported to have threatened ethnic violence. He noted that the Minister of the Interior of
Burundi had confirmed that the Imbonakure formed part of the national security strategy, as
the CAT also pointed out in its concluding observations.

Special Adviser Dieng reminded the Government of Burundi of its obligation to protect its
populations, regardless of their ethnicity or political affiliation, and to refrain from any action
or discourse that could inflame ethnic tensions. He highlighted the importance of countering
such messages with alternative speech to foster unity rather than further entrench divisions,
and called on all parties to prioritize inclusive dialogue to bring about an end to the protracted
crisis.

For media queries: UN Office on Prevention of Genocide and Responsibility to Protect
Ms. Taryn Lesser (Email: lesser@un.org; Phone: +1 917 367 5254)
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide on the situation in South Sudan
(New York, 11 July 2016) The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, expressed his deep concern at the threat to the populations of South
Sudan posed by the renewed fighting of the last few days between forces loyal to President
Salva Kiir and those loyal to First Vice President Riek Machar.

“Several hundred people have already been killed, including civilians seeking refuge. Some
of the civilians killed were reportedly targeted based on their ethnicity. I echo the words of
the Secretary-General, who called on President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar to do
everything in their power to de-escalate hostilities immediately and ensure the withdrawal of
their forces to their bases. If they fail to do so, South Sudan could be plunged back into civil
war, at unimaginable human cost.”
Special Adviser Dieng reminded the Transitional Government of National Unity of its
responsibility to protect its populations, irrespective of their ethnicity or political affiliation
He also stressed the urgent need to end impunity in South Sudan and bring to justice all those
responsible for violations of international human rights and humanitarian law. Special
Adviser Dieng called on the Transitional Government to implement Chapter V of the 2015
Peace Agreement, in which the signatories agreed to establish a hybrid court to prosecute
cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as well as other serious
crimes under international law, and a commission for truth, healing and reconciliation. "It
would be a mistake to think that peace, reconciliation and national healing can be achieved in
South Sudan without any accountability for the crimes committed”, he commented.

“Amnesty is not an option. Those who oppose accountability could be seen as abetting the
atrocities committed in South Sudan by protecting the perpetrators.”
******

For media queries please contact:
Martine Nouma
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 0904
Email: nouma@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

For immediate release
Statement of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, on the
situation in the Kingdom of Bahrain
[New York, 22 June 2016] The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, expressed concern at the decision taken by the Interior
Ministry of Bahrain on 20 June 2016 to revoke the citizenship of Sheikh Issa Qassem, a
prominent Shia religious leader, and on the impact this decision can have in increasing
tensions among the different constituencies in the country.

“I am aware that the decision on Sheikh Issa Qassem has triggered new protests, which I
am afraid could increase tensions in Bahrain in the coming days. I call on the Government
to ensure that the right to freedom of peaceful assembly is fully respected and that any
response to the protests is in accordance with Bahrain’s obligations under international
human rights law. I also call on the protestors to exercise their rights peacefully and to
avoid any act of violence”. In the view of Special Adviser Dieng, “the decision to revoke
Sheikh Issa Qassem’s citizenship is the latest in a series of actions by the Bahraini
authorities in recent weeks that have further restricted space for public participation and the
enjoyment of human rights in Bahrain”.

The Special Adviser noted that, since July 2014, the United Nations has documented the
revocation of the nationalities of up to 250 individuals, reportedly on the grounds of alleged
“disloyalty to the interests of the Kingdom”. Other worrying developments documented by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) include the re-arrest of
Nabil Rajab, founder of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights; the imposition of travel bans
on several others human rights defenders; the dissolution of Al Wefaq, the largest
opposition political grouping; the increase in the sentence of opposition political leader
Sheikh Ali Salman; and, earlier on in 2016, the re-arrest of Mr. Ibrahim Sharif, the leader of
the Waad Society. Furthermore, OHCHR noted that, in the last week, five Shia clerics were
interrogated, and Friday prayers by Shia mosques were suspended until further notice, as
mosque leaders said they felt “unsafe”.

The Special Adviser added: “Repression will not eliminate people’s grievances; it will only
increase them. For this reason, I call on the Bahraini authorities to seek to de-escalate the
situation and on all decision-makers, in Bahrain and at the regional level, as well as on
political parties and groups, military, religious, tribal and community leaders to exercise
restraint and to take all possible measures to prevent the further increase of tensions”. In the
Special Adviser’s views, “the country and the region are facing a critical moment. It is now
even more crucial for the authorities and for all relevant parties to recommit to an inclusive
national dialogue in the interest of all people of Bahrain”.

-*For media queries please contact:
Davide Zaru
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 3573
Email: zaru@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

For immediate release
Statement of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, in
response to the escalation of islamophobia and homophobia following the events in
Orlando
[New York, 16 June 2016] The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, condemned the criminal attack that took place at the Pulse
nightclub in Orlando, Florida, United States, on 12 June, in which 49 people were killed
and 53 injured. He offered his sympathy for the victims and expressed grave concern at the
outpouring of hatred, homophobia and Islamophobia that followed this attack, which
targeted the Lesbian Gay Bisexual and Transsexual (LGBT) community.

Vitriolic messages were addressed at Muslims, immigrants and the LGBT community, in
particular. “At a time when there was greatest need for sympathy and solidarity, I was
appalled by the immediate and shameful efforts of some political and religious leaders to
manipulate and politicise the events in Orlando to fuel fear, intolerance and hatred. I was
particularly sickened to hear religious leaders commend the killings of members of the
LGBT community”. Mr. Dieng referred to statements by some religious leaders, including
one who labelled those killed in Orlando as “disgusting perverts and pedophiles” and
calling on governments worldwide “to execute LGBT people”. Mr. Dieng also criticized
calls by some politicians to cite radical Islam as the cause of the attack in Orlando, to ban
Muslims from the United States and to label all Muslims as “terrorists”.

“Religious and sexual minorities are subjected to discrimination, human rights violations
and violence worldwide, including in peaceful and democratic societies”, Mr. Dieng
stated. “However, they are most vulnerable during difficult times.” “It is simply
unacceptable that influential leaders, including political and religious leaders, spread the
kind of dangerous homophobic and islamophobic messages that we have seen in public
discourse and the media this week,” he said.

Special Adviser Dieng stressed that the deliberate spread of misinformation and the
manipulation of people’s fears and concerns for political gain can only contribute to
feeding division and hatred. He reminded political and religious leaders that any advocacy
of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence is prohibited under international human rights law as well as by the legislations
of many countries.

Mr. Dieng reiterated his call to political and religious leaders to publicly counter lies,
prejudice and fear, to act responsibly and with respect for both international and national
laws.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Simona Cruciani
United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention
and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917-367-5430
Email: cruciani@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, on recent inflammatory rhetoric by President Yahya Jammeh of the
Gambia, targeting the Mandinka ethnic group
(New York, 7 June 2016) The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, Adama Dieng, condemned the inflammatory speech by President Yahya
Jammeh of the Gambia at a political rally in Tallinding on 3 June, in which he reportedly
threatened to eliminate the Mandinka ethnic group. President Jammeh allegedly referred
to the Mandinka as “enemies, foreigners” and threatened to kill them one by one and
place them “where even a fly cannot see them”.

“I am profoundly alarmed by President Jammeh’s public stigmatisation, dehumanisation
and threats against the Mandinka,” the Special Adviser stated. “Public statements of this
nature by a national leader are irresponsible and extremely dangerous. They can
contribute to dividing populations, feed suspicion and serve to incite violence against
communities, based solely on their identity.”
The Special Adviser was particularly appalled by President Jammeh’s vitriolic rhetoric as
history has shown that hate speech that constitutes incitement to violence can be both a
warning sign and a powerful trigger for atrocity crimes. “We have seen, in Rwanda,
Bosnia – and more recently in the Middle East - how incitement to violence has led to
mass killings along identity lines,” the Special Adviser stated. He reminded President
Jammeh that any advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence is prohibited under international human
rights law as well as under national legislation.

States have the primary responsibility to protect their populations. In 2005, all Heads of
State and Government acknowledged the responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, as well as their
incitement. “I urge the President of the Gambia to fulfil this responsibility,” said the
Special Adviser, “and ensure that the rights of all populations of the Gambia are
respected, irrespective of ethnicity or political affiliation.”
For media queries please contact:
Martine Nouma
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963-0904 Email: nouma@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, on the situation of
civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic
(New York, 9 May 2016) Responding to the deadliest two weeks since the Cessation of Hostilities
accord, which came into effect on 27 February 2016, the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, expressed his outrage at the ongoing indiscriminate and seemingly
calculated attacks against civilians and civilian objects in Syria.

“Between 27 April and 5 May 2016, there were at least six attacks on medical facilities by different
parties to the conflict in the north-western governorate of Aleppo alone. The attack against the Al
Quds Hospital on 27 April reportedly killed 55 civilians, including the last pediatrician in the city” –
noted the Special Adviser. On 5 May, an attack on the Kamouna Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)
camp in northern Idlib governorate killed at least 30 civilians.

“These attacks reflect the continued blatant disrespect of international humanitarian law by all parties
to the conflict, and may constitute war crimes”, the Special Adviser stated. “The international
community cannot allow the perpetrators of flagrant violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law to enjoy impunity. Just a few days ago, in its Resolution 2286 on Healthcare in
Armed Conflict, the Security Council reiterated the need for Member States to uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law and ensure that the responsible parties are held to
account. It is crucial that the Council consistently apply this principle”.

The Special Adviser concluded: “The Member States have a duty not to fail the Syrian people yet
again and to uphold their pledge to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing. In this respect, the international community should step up its
commitment to end impunity for the perpetrators of the most serious crimes in Syria and thus
contribute to preventing new atrocities from being committed. For this reason, I strongly support the
Secretary-General’s repeated calls to the Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court”.

***

For media queries please contact:
Davide Zaru
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 3573
Email: zaru@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, on the
conviction of Radovan Karadzic for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
(New York, - 24 March 2016) The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, expressed his satisfaction at today’s verdict by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) against Radovan Karadzic, who was President of the
Republika Srpksa and Supreme Commander of the Bosnian Serb Army from April 1992 to
July 1996. Mr. Karadzic has been found guilty of ten out of eleven charges against him,
including charges of genocide for the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, war crimes for taking
hostage United Nations peacekeepers serving in the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR), and war crimes and crimes against humanity during the siege of Sarajevo by
the Bosnian Serb Army. “Today is an historic day. The verdict by the ICTY against Radovan
Karadzic sends a clear message that impunity will not prevail and that no one is above the
law.”
Special Adviser Dieng paid his respect to the victims of the crimes committed by Mr.

Karadzic and expressed full solidarity with them. “This verdict renders justice to the
survivors and the families of victims of the atrocity crimes committed by Karadzic. Nothing
will return their loved ones to them but they can now have the comfort of knowing that those
crimes will not go unpunished.” At the same time, he stressed that today’s verdict “is not only
about the past but is also about the future. Accountability constitutes a critical component of
prevention and also an important step along the path to national post-crisis reconciliation.” In
his view, “this verdict will assist the entire region to think about what happened, learn the
lessons of the past and chart a future that fully acknowledges the past.”
Special Adviser Dieng underlined that the impact of today’s verdict would be felt well
beyond Bosnia-Herzegovina and the region. “This verdict will resonate across the world and
is a warning to all those who are committing or condoning the commission of acts that can
incite or constitute atrocity crimes: it sends the message that wherever and whoever you are,
sooner or later you will also face the weight of justice.”
In his view, this verdict is also important because impunity has become norm in so many
cases and is having a direct impact on the failure to prevent the escalation of crises. “It is
abundantly clear when we look at events of the last decades that absence of accountability
increases the risk that atrocity crimes will be committed. Let us spare no effort to ensure that
all necessary measures are taken to facilitate access of every single victim to impartial and
independent justice.” In this regard, the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
reiterated his full support for the work of the ICTY, which has prosecuted the most serious
international crimes committed in Europe since the Nuremberg trials, and for the work of the
International Criminal Court and other international tribunals. He called on all Member States
to abide by their obligations under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and enact the necessary legislation that will allow these crimes to be
prosecuted at the national level, in a manner fully compliant with fair trial standards.

For media queries please contact:
Mario Buil-Merce
United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Tel: +1 917 367 5001
Email: buil-merce@un.org.

Statement by Special Advisor on RtoP Jennifer Welsh at the Thematic Discussion in the
UN General Assembly on “Ten Years of the Responsibility to Protect: From Commitment
to Implementation” [TRANSCRIBED]
26 February 2016
Thank you Mr. Chairman, Ambassadors, Excellencies, fellow panelists and ladies and
gentlemen.

As the Special Advisor to this Secretary General who has shown steadfast commitment to the
development and implementation of the Responsibility to Protect, it’s a great pleasure and
honour to address this event convened by the president of the General Assembly. My fellow
panelists have had long and distinguished careers dedicated to international public service and to
addressing situations that involve the gravest violations of human rights and their presentations
reflect that wisdom and that normative commitment.

Paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 Summit Outcome document, which affirm a political
commitment to protecting populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing, were designed to be more than just diplomatic words or an expression of the
lowest common denominator. With the failures of collective action represented by both Rwanda
and Srebrenitsa in the backdrop, they aspire to something more, to reducing the gap between
existing legal responses of states, which are clearly evident in black and white in international
humanitarian and human rights law. And the reality of populations threatened with large-scale
and systematic violence.

Indeed that is what normative commitments are designed to do. Aspiration is at their very core.

Yet experience also demonstrates that the normative ideas that have the greatest impact are those
that do not stray to far from what member states collectively believe is legitimate. And so with
the more controversial case of the Kosovo War also within their minds, the diplomats and
political leaders present within the World Summit, hammered out a version of the Responsibility
to Protect that would honour the letter and spirit of the UN Charter and serve as an ally rather
than as an adversary of sovereignty. And 10 years on I think their formulation displays great
wisdom.

But a decade on, any evaluation of the Responsibility to Protect needs to assess its progress. Not
just in terms of how close we are to meeting the aspiration, a world where these acts are
prevented or minimized, but also in terms of how it has changed expectations. And moreover
that assessment should take place in relation to other normative efforts of the same ilk. The
principle of the Responsibility to Protect is still in the relatively early stages of what is a long and
uneven journey. Some commentators seem to hold the principle of the Responsibility to Protect
to an impossibly demanding standard, in terms of both what it should have achieved and by
when.

And when reflecting today we are confronted with the obvious fact that atrocity crimes remain a
feature of the 21st century landscape. In fact in the last two years alone acts that may constitute
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity occurred in the Central

African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of North
Korea, Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, South Sudan, Sudan, Syria and Yemen. This is a long list. The
majority of these acts have been perpetrated by governments or by factions supported by
governments. But the overall sense of crisis now confronted by the international community is
heightened by the emergence of violent extremists who brazenly flout international humanitarian
law and glorify their crimes.

Taken together, these situations have created protection challenges of a monumental scale, which
you in this chamber are all too well aware. When we turn to the specific armed conflicts on our
landscape, there is as the Deputy Secretary-General highlighted, an alarming decline in respect
for international humanitarian and human rights law on the parts of states that have ratified
relevant legal instruments. Often in situations where national authorities argue that exceptional
security threats or political crises justify abrogation from these legal obligations.

The scale of civilian harm today ladies and gentlemen, is not the tragic but inevitable
consequence of what happens in the fog of war, but rather the result of conscious choices made
by warring sides. And we should be clear about what the consequences of this are. Navi Pillay
admirably laid out the human and economic cost, but we also need to remember the affect on our
normative and legal landscape and a culture of restraint, which has been painstakingly built up.

Now as you can tell from the emotion in my own voice, it would be tempting to view these
trends as proof of RtoP’s failure, but to do so would be to blame the principle rather than those
who are trusted with upholding it. The Responsibility to Protect cannot on its own compel states
to act. No political principle can do that. Nor can it dictate what specific actions the international
community should take in any particular case. States and other actors need to choose from a
variety of mechanisms, which the Responsibility to Protect in part has been helpful in clarifying
over the last decade.

But what the principle can do is create political pressure around situations involving atrocity
crimes and raise the political cost of inaction. It can also clarify existing obligations and provide
a practical policy framework for states to implement effective measures for prevention and
response. On these measures, as my fellow panelists have stated, Responsibility to Protect has
had a significant impact. And the dark landscape I painted a few moments ago suggests that its
relevance is as strong as it was a decade ago. The principle has helped to create a category of acts
that are by their very nature, issue of international concern. By establishing a floor of decency
beyond which states themselves agree that populations should not fall.

This has changed and elevated expectations about what should occur when populations fall
below that threshold, and galvanize an array of efforts, including research and policy
development to prevent the decent into systematic violence. This is worth celebrating today. We
simply know more than we did a decade ago about why some states descend into atrocity crime
situations, while some do not.

This progress is usually obscured by a singular focus on the issue of the use of force. To evaluate
Responsibility to Protect’s success in terms of whether we see a consistent military pattern of
intervention is to demand too little and too much. To little, because there are many other tools
and mechanisms that can be brought to bear, to address situations featuring atrocity crimes.

Assessing how the international community has responded to date and how it could respond in
future, requires analysis of these non-military means and conditions under which they are
effective. And too little because like all issue areas that touch on the use of coercive means,
implementation of Responsibility to Protect is profoundly shaped by the dynamics within, and
unique structure of, the UN Security Council.

The intense debates we have seen in this chamber during successive interactive dialogues, have
brought into sharp relief why Responsibility to Protect was, and will remain, a demanding
principle. It challenges states to make concrete decisions domestically, to enhance their ability to
engage in risk assessments, to invest in the inhibitors to atrocity crimes and to improve their
ability to assist other states under stress. These imply real resources and real policy attention. But
that is what is implied by the Responsibility to Protect.

The principle also challenges us at the international level to honestly assess the barriers to
collective action, which are not by the way unique to the Responsibility to Protect, but which are
laid bare in cases in which atrocity crimes have been committed or imminent. But we must do
more than identify the reasons for why collective action is not always mobilized. We must work
tirelessly to address or minimize those factors. Whether through changes to working methods,
improvements to our diplomatic toolbox, more focused and sustained political leadership, or
financial support for the mechanisms that have worked and can work. This too is our shared
responsibility.

Ladies and Gentlemen we should not shy away from a principle because it is demanding.

Instead, we should creatively explore how we can do better. That is what all of us on this panel
have tried to do and which many of you in this chamber have tried to do. As Secretary General
Ban-Ki moon has noted, Responsibility to Protect offers an alternative to indifference and
fatalism. It constitutes a milestone in transforming national concern about people facing mortal
danger, into meaningful response.

The challenges of atrocity crimes may indeed be daunting and human cost staggering, but we
cannot lapse into thinking that the means to prevent them are beyond our reach. The past decade
of the Responsibility to Protect has shown us that this is not the case. The next decade must build
on these concrete advances to ensure the protection of all populations.

I thank you for your attention and I very much look forward to you comments. I will be listening
very carefully to your thoughts and recommendations.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in
Yemen
(New York, - 16 February 2016) Amidst reports of continuing intense airstrikes and ground
fighting in Yemen, including in the capital Sana’a, the Special Advisers to the SecretaryGeneral on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect expressed
concern at the heavy toll on civilians of the conflict in Yemen.

The two Special Advisers noted that “One year after the escalation of the conflict in Yemen,
the world is witnessing the erosion of respect for international humanitarian and human rights
law on a daily basis in the country. Civilians and civilian infrastructures continue to be
targeted by all parties to the conflict, to the point that the attention of the international media
has largely become saturated. We call on the international community - and notably on the
Security Council - to take action to end this unacceptable situation”.

The Special Advisers underlined that serious abuses and violations of human rights law and
of international humanitarian law by all sides and their allied forces have been extensively
documented, including by the United Nations. Evidence gathered suggests that some of these
violations may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.

“We acknowledge that the parties have expressed regret at the number of civilian casualties
and have committed to the principle of accountability,” the Special Advisers observed. “We
now expect that commitments by the Yemeni authorities and by Saudi Arabia to conduct
credible and independent investigations into all alleged violations and provide reparations to
victims will be swiftly implemented. It is imperative that the international community also
gives immediate consideration to the most effective means of supporting this goal, including
the possibility of establishing an international independent and impartial mechanism to
support accountability in Yemen”.

Noting the co-operation between State Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) and the
Saudi-led coalition, the Special Advisers requested that these State Parties lead by example
by fulfilling one of the treaty’s main purposes, which is to control arms flows to actors that
may use them in ways that breach international humanitarian law.

Finally, Special Advisers Dieng and Welsh warned that the impact of the violence in Yemen
is already spreading across the border with Saudi Arabia and within the broader region. They
concluded: “The international community cannot afford to underestimate the risk of a spillover of a conflict that is fuelling religious and sectarian divide. We must, collectively, make
the protection of the civilian populations of Yemen our primary consideration if we are to
avoid a catastrophe in this region”.

*16 February 2016*

For media queries please contact:
Davide Zaru
Political Affairs Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 3573
Email: zaru@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect on the situation of
civilians in the Syrian Arab Republic
(New York, 12 February 2016) The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, and the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to
Protect, Jennifer Welsh, expressed alarm at the deepening humanitarian emergency and lack of
protection of civilian populations in Syria, and welcomed the commitment made on 11-12 February
by members of the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) to immediately facilitate the full
implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 2254.

“Civilian populations in Syria are in a dire situation and in desperate need of protection,” the Special
Advisers stated. “They are subjected on a daily basis to indiscriminate air strikes, deliberate
starvation, denial of medical care, enforced disappearance, arbitrary detention and torture. These acts
must stop immediately. They represent a complete rejection of the protected status of civilians, who
are being used as pawns by all parties to the conflict, with complete disregard for human life.”
The Special Advisers welcomed the decision of the members of the ISSG to use their influence to
ensure that all parties allow immediate and sustained humanitarian access to populations throughout
Syria and immediately and significantly reduce violence, with the goal of implementing a nationwide
cessation of hostilities within one week.

“We are at a turning point. The measures identified by the ISSG are critical in order to alleviate the
suffering of the civilian populations and ensure their protection. The attacks against Syrian civilians
over the last five years, in violation of international human rights and humanitarian law, may amount
to war crimes and crimes against humanity. It is now time to restore their dignity and the protection
they are entitled to under international law.”
The Special Advisers urged States not to fail the Syrian populations yet again and to uphold their
commitment to protect populations from war crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. “The protection of the populations of Syria is the primary responsibility of the Syrian
state. However, in face of the state’s abject failure to do so, the international community has the
responsibility to take timely and decisive measures to protect populations in Syria.” The Special
Advisers reiterated their support for the positive steps taken by the ISSG and called upon members of
the group to ensure that their decisions are more than commitments on paper but are implemented on
the ground without delay.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Sarah Jacquier Nobel
United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212-963-3574
Email: jacquier@un.org