REPUBLIC OF POLAND
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
750 THIRD AVENUE, NEW YORK, NY 10017 TEL. (212) 744-2506
Check against delivery
STATEMENT BY
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
AMBASSADOR BOGUSLAW WINID
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON
THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT
NEW YORK, 6 SEPTEMBER 2016 Mr. President,
At the outset, let me thank you for convening this General Assembly interactive dialogue on the
important issue of responsibility to protect. We also thank Secretary General Ban Ki-moon for his recent
report on this matter and welcome today’s presentations by all panelistsPoland aligns itself with the statement of the European Union and would like to underline some key
points in its national capacity.

Mr. President,
Prevention of conflicts lies in the heart of the United Nations activities and it constitutes the very core of
responsibility to protect. Conflict prevention is a choice and effort we need to make every day in order to
build more peaceful and prosperous societies. Given the current global challenges and threats, it is
necessary to consistently increase our capacities for early-warning and prevention both at home as well
as at the international levelPoland has been an active supporter of mass atrocity prevention policies. Within the UN framework, we
proudly joined over half of the UN Member States and committed ourselves to the Code of Conduct on
the atrocity crimes prevention, initiated by the ACT Group. We also endorsed French-Mexican initiative to
limit the use of veto by the permanent members of the Security Council in cases of genocide, ethnic
cleansing, crimes against humanity and war crimesMr. President,
We truly believe that time has come to enhance the implementation of RtoP and mainstream this
important concept deeper into the UN activities. We also concur with those delegations who supported
the ideas of including responsibility to protect in the formal agenda of the General Assembly and
reaffirming our commitment to RtoP through a new General Assembly resolution.

In our opinion, it is also important to recognize and strengthen linkages between RtoP and other sectors
such as peacekeeping, peacebuilding, women’s rights and participation or disarmament. Protection of
civilians requires comprehensive prevention policies and measuresWe would also like to recognize the fundamental role played by the civil society actors in advancing and
upholding the responsibility to protect since its adoption in 2005