Statement delivered by Russia – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Thank you, Mr. Moderator. We take into account the most recent report of the Secretary General on
Responsibility to Protect. We note the continuing promotion of this issue on specific country subjects,
including Syria. The report confirms that many states state that a danger for citizens comes from their
own governments. Similar attempts to artificially simplify the situations in black and white terms cannot
help but concern us.

In the report, there is also a reference to the Libyan situation. As is known, the armed intervention into
this country in 2011 led to serious worsening of the situation – the increase in civilian suffering and the
paralysis of state institutions. A continuation of this conflict led to a number of consequences, from a
spread of weapons and instability throughout the region to the migration crisis in the Mediterranean.

These, and other issues in 2011, once again are recalling the lack of preparation in the decisions that were
made in that period.

As a whole, the fragile consensus of 2005 was significantly affected. This example should have led us to
think about the fact that there is something that is not right with this concept on R2P, and how it should
not be used for one country’s interpretation. It is to be regretted that in the report, there is no note of
this issue, as well as the issues that took place in Libya.

In conclusion, we wish to stress that without an honest, multilateral analysis of what took place in Libya both from the Secretariat and from states - discussing any further development of R2P would be very
difficult. Unfortunately, the experience of the previous years has shown that interactive dialogues on R2P
lead further and further to a monologue of those who are proponents of the concept, and who are very
sensitive to any criticism of this concept. With this as the background, an increased value of the inclusion
of R2P into the official agenda of the General Assembly, and the adoption of a resolution on this topic, is
not very clear for us.

We have many more questions on the report, but unfortunately during three minutes we would not be
able to list them all.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, at
the United Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion on "From commitment
to implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
26 February 2016
Apart from the Jubilee of the World Summit Outcome document, which has already passed, we
would like to remind everyone about a more recent anniversary, and this is of Libya. Five years
ago it was bombed. In 2011, many enthusiastically labeled these bombings as the first case of
the practical application of the R2P concept. Currently, however, these events are considered to
be best forgotten.

Not surprisingly, I haven’t heard about Libya in the opening part of today’s session. Use of force
under the pretext of the protection of civilians led to complete disintegration of the Libyan state,
plunging the country in to complete havoc and instability. Such echoes of this tragedy, as the
migration crisis in the Mediterranean will linger for many years to come. That considered, we
have not seen a single attempt at frank and comprehensive analysis in what happened in Libya,
neither by the Secretariat nor by the member states.

The annual interactive dialogue on R2P has completely turned into the monologue of the
supporters of this concept. I say the monologue not because other views are not present, but
because they are listened to, but not heard. In such a situation, it would be difficult to discuss any
development of R2P whatsoever, including in the new substantive resolution of the GA, because
the fact that we have been unable to adopt such a resolution is quite telling that the consensus is
not there yet.

To finalize, I am very grateful to the esteemed Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kyrgyzstan
for the important clarification, as I was indeed surprised to hear the panel mention Kyrgyzstan as
well as some other countries as the R2P success stories. It is distorted information