Statement delivered by Rwanda – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016 [UNOFFICIAL
TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]

Thank you, Mr. Moderator.

Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen – from the outset I would like to thank the Secretary General for his
annual report on the Responsibility to Protect. Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you, Mr.

Moderator, for your appointment as Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. We commend the
work done by your predecessor, Dr. Jennifer Welsh, and it is our hope that you will capitalize on the
current progress in mainstreaming R2P in the daily work of the United Nations.

Rwanda associates itself with the statement delivered by the Netherlands on behalf of the Group of
Friends of R2P. This year’s report of the Secretary talks of the progress in the implementation of R2P since
the adoption of the World Summit Document in 2005, in global efforts to prevent genocide and mass
atrocity crimes. Looking back 11 years down the road, we agree with the Secretary General that although
important strides were made both at the United Nations and at the individual member states level, the
Responsibility to Protect remains a source of contestation. Despite important conceptual progress and
consensus built around R2P, implementation of the 2005 political commitment by member states,
regional organizations and the UN itself has been inadequate in the face of a number of current crises
where populations face mass atrocity crimes.

Claims about the status of R2P as a new norm of international conduct have been strongly resisted, and
commission of mass atrocities are not only widespread, but reoccurring in many parts of the world. Today,
Responsibility to Protect has more support in principle, but is far from being put into practice. We believe
that action to prevent future genocide and mass atrocities involves broad areas of activity, including
preventing armed conflict, protecting civilians in armed conflict, ending impunity, ensuring early and clear
warning and taking swift and decisive action.

The Kigali Principles that are now endorsed by 35 member states present a framework for effective
protection of civilians in armed conflicts. However, prevention is better than protection. It is of utmost
importance that governments, regional organizations and the international community focus their
attention on addressing the underlying causes of conflict. We believe that instead of spending time with
conceptual and ideological debates, the international community should invest much more in the
development of strong institutions that establish the foundation of good governance, based on the rule
of law, democratic principles and values, and accountability to contribute in building societies resilient to
atrocity crimes and contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights. Regional and sub
regional organizations must also develop the capacity to streamline and implement their efforts to
intervene when civilians are endangered.

Finally, we look forward to the recommendation from this interactive dialogue, including considerations
of R2P as a formal agenda item by the General Assembly. Like other previous speakers, we are also
encouraged by the growing number of countries who appointed a national Focal Point on R2P, and we
hope more will do so in the near future.

PERMANENT MISSION OF RWANDA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS

STATEMENT
BY
H.E. EUGENE-RICHARD GASANA
MINISTER OF STATE IN CHARGE OF COOPERATION AND
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF RWANDA TO THE UN
AT THE
HIGH LEVEL EVENT ON THE FUTURE OF CIVILIAN
PROTECTION IN PEACE OPERATIONS: ENDORSING AND
IMPLEMENTING THE KIGALI PRINCIPLES
Please check against delivery

NEW YORK, MAY 11, 2016

Page

1

President of the General Assembly Mogens Lykketoft,
Honorable Ministers,
Our distinguished panelists,
Distinguished Delegates,
It is an honor to be with you today for this one-of-a-kind event that allows us to reaffirm our
commitment to protecting civilians in armed conflict through the endorsement of the Kigali
Principles. We have a special opportunity today to shape the future of UN peacekeeping by
adhering to 18 principles that hold our efforts to the highest standards as troop and police
contributing countries, as peacekeepers, as mission), as mission leadership, as protection of
civilian stakeholders. The failures of our past should not dictate our future but rather should
inform us of what we can do better.

The 1994 Genocide Against the Tutsi blatantly took the lives of over a million Rwandans and
impressed upon us the conviction that we must take every measure necessary to secure the lives
of civilians. This conviction coupled with our history fueled our desire to contribute to
peacekeeping in a profound way. We currently have over 6,000 troops and police serving in
numerous peacekeeping missions and we aspire to contribute even more. Our troops and police
live by the guiding words of the Kigali Principles. The receive extensive pre-deployment training
on the protection of civilians, believe in identifying threats to civilians, prepared to use force
when necessary and consistent with the mandate, and posses an unwavering determination to
deliver on their responsibility to thoroughly protect. Almost a year after the inception of the
Kigali Principles, we have troop and police contributing countries from different regions of the
world endorsing them. I thank the following countries for their resolute commitment to
protecting the lives of civilians: Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Italy, Netherlands, Senegal, Sri Lanka,
Uganda, and Uruguay whom have been with us since the very beginning, and the new
endorsements by Austria, Belgium, Burkina Faso, Djibouti, Estonia, Ghana, Guinea, Malawi,
Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Ukraine, United States, Zambia, Sweden, Ireland, and
Finland.

Dear Colleagues,

Page

2

The UN in particular has an essential role to play in advancing the principles, for their effective
implementation must come from the body that brought us together in 1945 to secure peace and
security for all generations to come. In aiding our efforts, the UN can assist us in invoking the
principles in all the areas in which they are vital to, from the pre-deployment training standards
the UN enforces to the materialization of a rapid deployment component that can swiftly aid the
UN when a crisis hits. The Secretary-General’s endorsement of the principles can assist in
further institutionalizing the principles, guaranteeing that other organs of the UN, such as the
Security Council, regularly heed the counsel of troop and police contributing countries in
developing and renewing mission mandates, especially those tied to the protection of civilians.

As H.E. President Paul Kagame has poignantly stated, we must ensure that the “necessity to
protect civilians does not get lost in ideological debates,” which are void of action and do
nothing to save lives.

The reality is that conflicts are escalating in number and changing in nature at levels and speeds
that are unprecedented. We must meet these challenges head on by adapting and modernizing
our ways of old. This includes having robust and proactive peacekeeping that closes the gaps on
what is asked of us to protect civilians and what we actually provide. This also calls for the need
to rid our missions of the sexual exploitation and abuse allegations that still plague our efforts.

As one of the principles denotes, we must “hold our personnel to the highest standards of
conduct…” and prosecute accordingly so that impunity does not mean immunity. Our
peacekeepers have been entrusted with protecting the lives of civilians, so let us work together to
sustain this expectation.

Dear Colleagues,
What is most at stake is not the legacy we intend to leave behind but rather the lives of those
civilians that have involuntarily been absorbed in conflicts and wars that have taken their loved
ones, endangered their lives and stolen their livelihood. I ask those member states present here
today that have not endorsed the principles to deeply consider them and their contribution to
peacekeeping, for at the very core of our efforts lies one fundamental task: the protection of any
and all civilians.

Page

3

The way forward must be guided by a collective effort from each of us that strengthens our
present peacekeeping efforts and sets the foundation for future pursuits of peace and security.

Today, we have the opportunity to write a narrative that matches our innate desire to save the
lives of those civilians entangled in armed conflict. Ambassador Samantha Power has been
writing the pages of this narrative, working fervently to secure the United States’ support for
these principles. She has witnessed first hand the terrible plight civilians continue to endure and
felt at the most profound levels the responsibility to do more to better protect them. Her
unrelenting leadership in advancing the protection of civilians has made us all reexamine our
own contributions to peacekeeping and fortified the important role peacekeepers play in
protecting civilians. Ambassador Power, thank you for your tireless efforts, your invaluable
contribution to these principles does not go unnoticed.

I would also like to thank the experts that have worked day in and day out to seeing the
materialization of these principles unfold. Thank you Gideon Maltz, Col Vincent Nyakarundi,
Col Raoul Bazatoha, Col Nortbert Moerkens, and Eran Nagan for all your hard work. You have
been the impetus for the growing endorsement of these principles.

Let us leave here today with an even deeper conviction for saving lives and an equally profound
understanding that what we choose to do or not does affect distant lands and unfamiliar faces that
have far too often paid the highest cost in today’s conflicts. We ask those of you who have not
endorsed the principles yet to join us in crafting a future that puts the lives of civilians at the core
of our efforts.

Rwanda’s Statement at the 2016 UN General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion, From Commitment
to Implementation: Ten Years of Responsibility to Protect [Transcribed]
Mr. Moderator, if you allow me in my national capacity, I have just one question if it is possible. It will
not take more than one minute.

I ask Professor Gareth [Evans] and the other panelists a thought provoking question in light of what is
happening in Burundi.

We all know what is happening there. We have seen various statements of the [UN Security] Council
and other interested parties, including the AU [African Union] and other Member States. We have
various reports, some of them with a particular narrative, that have nothing to do with the prevention of
mass atrocities. Innocent civilians continue to pay the ultimate price.

As my president, President Kagame, recently put it, I quote, “As usual, when the toll will be finally
counted and found to be too high and questions asked about the Responsibility to Protect, the simple
answer will be ‘We did not know,’ read ‘We did not want to know.’ The argument, we go on and on, and
lives will continue to be lost. Instead of ‘Never Again’ we have ‘Yet Again.’”
I would really welcome your views, dear panelists, on this particular issue as someone who contributed
quite a lot in putting together the concept of R2P. I am sure this might be a difficult question but it will
help my understanding, our understanding, to see how we can protect the people in Burundi.

I am saying this in my own national capacity. I am so sorry to use this time