8

Check against delivery

 

Statement by H.E. Andrej LOGAR,
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Slovenia
to the UN

at an informal interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on the Report
of the Secretary-General on the responsibility of protect

 

6 September 2016

 

Mr. moderator, Deputy Secretary-General, distinguished panelists ,

| would like to thank you for convening this informal interactive dialogue and the
Secretary General for his final report on "Mobilizing collective action: The next decade
of the responsibility to protect".

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union.

More than 10 years ago we the member states recognized the need to strengthen our
efforts to prevent atrocity crimes and to protect all populations from ever facing such
reality again. Now we the member states have to recognize the hard reality: we are still
faced with images of widespread and systematic violations of human rights and the
rule of law, armed conflicts and acts of violent extremism on a daily basis. And the
consequences are disastrous: unprecedented humanitarian crises and the largest
displacement of people in the recorded history.

It is the responsibility and the need for all states to meet their obligations under
international human rights and humanitarian law and to condemn any actions which go
against norms and principles that safeguard humanity. But the obligations go beyond
that - we have to do our utmost to prevent any such actions to occur again.

It has been stated time and again the need to improve the ability of the international
community to take timely and decisive early action. While recognizing that this is the
primary task of the Security Council, there is also a role for the UN Secretariat and
other Member States. We therefore continue to strongly support the Code of Conduct
presented by ACT group and French-Mexican initiative that call upon the Permanent
Members of the Security Council to agree to voluntarily refrain from using the veto in
situations of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity.

To strengthen early warning and early action mechanisms more can be done at
national and regional levels. We encourage the use of every tool available including the
"Framework of Analysis for the Prevention of Atrocity Crimes" which can serve as an
excellent guide for assessing risks, indicators and triggers of atrocity crimes. Slovenia
has recently translated this prevention tool in our national language and is currently
exercising awareness-raising activities for different target groups at national level.

Human rights education has the same preventive function and can go hand in hand
with this kind of awareness-raising. We stand ready to share our best practices and
initiatives. It is also of utmost importance to prevent conflict recurrence and to ensure
accountability for all crimes. We continue to express our support for the work of the
International Criminal Court as well as regional and state mechanisms to counter
impunity.

Coordinated action and preventative measures requires closer and stronger links
between nations but also within the UN system. We therefore welcome the growing
network of R2P Focal points and encourage all states to join those 55 states and the
European Union who already have appointed one. We also welcome the launch of the
R2P Group of friends in Geneva, which will additionally contribute to the better
understanding of the role Geneva-based institutions in prevention of mass atrocity
crimes.

Mr. President, to conclude,

Slovenia once again reaffirms its strong commitment to remain an advocate of R2P
and the wider promotion and protection of human rights. We support the inclusion of
R2P to the formal agenda of the General Assembly.

We strongly support the efforts of the Secretary General and his team to improve the
system-wide capacity of the UN to prevent and respond to serious violations of
international humanitarian law, especially those violations that lead to genocide, war
crimes, or crimes against humanity.

We would also like to recognize the invaluable contribution of the former Special
Adviser on R2P Ms. Jennifer Welsh and express our sincere gratitude for her personal
and professional engagement in not only strengthening the commitment to R2P but
also mainstreaming R2P in the UN system. We also express our continuous support to
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide Mr Dieng and the next Special
Adviser on R2P Mr Simonovié.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of Slovenia to the United Nations, at the United
Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion on "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President of
the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
26 February 2016
Mr. Moderator,
Let me start by thanking the President of the General Assembly for convening this important
meeting and also all panelists for very insightful presentations for which we are very thankful.

As a member of the cross-regional group of countries that prepare this draft General Assembly
resolution on RtoP, which was formally presented yesterday, we received very mixed
reactions. We listened to everyone. Everyone was not only listened to, but also heard. Slovenia
calls on all member states to actively engage in negotiations that will lead to strong and
hopefully consensual adoption of a resolution, which will pave the way to better
implementation of the concept in the years to come.

In our opinion, and many panelists have expressed their position on that, the key element of RtoP
is prevention. It is imperative for us to consolidate the efforts at the national, regional, and global
levels in order to protect populations against genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and
ethnic cleansing. We also believe that we have to better use available preventive tools at our
disposal. When I say available tools I mean political, diplomatic, humanitarian, economic, and
legal, both in cooperative and coercive ways. No situation is identical and every situation requires
a tailor-made approach. Systematic human rights education, we believe, is an effective mode to
respect the rights of all peoples, which is itself a very important element of prevention.

True prevention can only happen with the political will of the countries involved. In this regard we
call on all current and future members of the Security Council not to block credible actions aimed
at preventing the most heinous and atrocious crimes. Slovenia supports the ACT Code of
Conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, war crimes, and crimes against
humanity and of course we applaud the French-Mexican Initiative on voluntary restraint of the use
of the veto in mass atrocity situations. In this context, I would like to reiterate, Slovenia’s strong
support and continued support for the Secretary-General Initiative, Human Rights up Front,
as well as support to the Special Advisers for Genocide and RtoP, as well as, of course, civil
society organizations engaged in prevention action.

To conclude, Mr. Moderator, Slovenia encourages and also invites all member states not yet
parties to the international conventions, and especially the Rome Statute of the ICC that sets out
the legal framework for the prevention and punishment of mass atrocity crimes, to become party
as soon as possible. This can give a very clear signal that mass atrocities are not acceptable and
will not be tolerated and there will be no safe haven anywhere for perpetrators of mass atrocities