PERMANENT MISSION OF SOUTH AFRICA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
333 EAST 38TH STREET 9TH FLOOR
NEW YORK, NY 10016
Tel: (212) 213-5583 Fax: (212) 692-2498
E-mail: pmun@southafrica-newyork.net
STATEMENT BY
MR. STEPHEN NTSOANE
FIRST SECRETARY
PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
FOR THE INFORMAL DIALOGUE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ON THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT
UNITED NATIONS
NEW YORK
TUESDAY, 6" SEPTEMBER 2016
PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY Mr President,
My delegation and | welcome this report from the Secretary-General and wish to
thank him for his continued commitment to Responsibility to Protect (RtoP) during his
term as Secretary-General of the United Nations. The Secretary-General's tireless
promotion of RtoP during his tenure has ensured that the political norm of RtoP now
has near universal support. We also thank the presenters for their statements.

Responsibility to Protect encapsulates a State’s responsibility to protect its
population from four specified atrocity crimes, namely: genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing and is to be implemented on the basis of the
Three Pillars of Responsibility, as defined in the 2009 Report of the UN Secretary-
GeneralWhile we, as an international community, have made strides on the implementation
of RtoP, much more should be done to guarantee the protection of our citizens
through the further operationalization of RtoP. This is being complicated by the
current challenging global context in which both state and non-state actors are failing
to adhere to their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
international human rights and humanitarian law.

Mr President,
South Africa fully supports the focus in the report on prevention tools and the idea
that regional and sub-regional bodies should develop mechanisms to assist in
capacity building with regard to conflict prevention and management. These tools
should also be deployed and developed by the UN Security Council, since over the
years, it has become rather unimaginative in its approach to conflict prevention. The
Secretary-General further lists options that could be considered by the Security
Council including, fact-finding missions; commissions of inquiry; monitoring,
mediation and negotiationEarly warning mechanisms are a necessary component for preventative diplomacy in
order for the Security Council to better anticipate risks, which in turn, would allow for
timely, appropriate and decisive responses.

Mr President,
The challenges to the implementation of RtoP, as mentioned by the Secretary-
General include inconsistent application of the principles of international law and the
unwillingness of some States to meet their global responsibilities to protect
populations from atrocity crimes. Political inactivity, especially within the Security
Council due to its political divisions, further stall action to protect vulnerable
1 Populations. These are all failures of Political will and is a result of the Security
Council too often pandering to the narrow self-interest of one or more of the
Council's permanent membersRegardless of these challenges, it is important to ensure that the spirit of the political
commitment made in 2005 is adhered to, especially when it becomes necessary for
the international community to implement commitments under Pillar Three. South
Africa reiterates its belief that any RtoP action must ensure that it is not isolated from
a political process aimed at achieving a sustainable solution; inclusive of all parties
concerned in a conflict. If military intervention is used as the last resort, it should be
done in line with the provisions of the UN Charter. A decision by the Security Council
to authorise the use of force in the name of RtoP should not be seen as a means to
Operate beyond the provisions and limitations of the rule of law. The Security Council
must retain its oversight role with regular briefings to the Council by the parties
involved, and with the Council remaining ceased of the matter, constantly reviewing
the process and adapting accordinglyIn conclusion, | would like to add that South Africa is open to discussing the
possibility of a new General Assembly resolution on reaffirming and deepening
Member States’ commitment to operationalizing the Responsibility to Protect within
the current political norm, but emphasises that such a decision must be the result of
the participation of the entire UN membership.

Mr President,
My delegation encourages the next Secretary-General to actively support and gather
the necessary resources to fully operationalize RtoP and utilise his/her mandate to
bring to the attention of the Security Council situations of concern that may not be on
its agendaSouth Africa supports the Secretary-General’s call for the United Nations to redouble
efforts to mainstream the Responsibility to Protect. More should be done to prioritise
conflict prevention and to strengthen preventative diplomacy tools, such as
mediation and negation, to resolve disputes