Statement delivered by Sudan – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Thank you, chair. In a dangerous world where there are so many differences between different
countries, sovereignty is the main line of defense. But the line of defense is not only important in
this context. It also means equality among all peoples in terms of dignity and protection of
people’s identity and their possibilities to determine their future. The principle of sovereignty,
especially equal sovereignty, is enshrined in Article 2.1 of the Charter. Which means that within
a state, the state can adopt measures regarding its sovereignty but it doesn’t mean absolute
authority. It is governed by laws upon the authority. When we are speaking of sovereignty as a
responsibility, this does not mean that any administration can interfere so long as a state exists
and can implement its own responsibilities vis-a-vis citizenry.

Because of certain forbidden actions such as interference as stated in the Charter, except for
humanitarian exceptions, the Security Council has interpreted Chapter 7 to allow such
interventions. We are of the view that we must take into account the main reasons for such
conflict. An intervention being there means that we have to face up to the lack of capacity of a
given democracy to enhance confidence and dealing with economic deprivation and lack of
economic opportunity.

During the last three decades, we have witnessed a deterioration of the environment which has
led to internal conflict and threatens the very survival of our planet. Which means that aggression
is not only upon peace and security but humankind as a whole so we must take into account
providing opportunities for development and cooperation to deal with the lack of justice in the
distribution of resources and in order to increase opportunities which developing countries
should have to be in the external markets and to engage in important changes in their structures
and organizations. This also requires a rethinking of the juridical protection and assisting
countries to implement sovereign laws and the possibility to protect their institutions. If we want
to enhance states’ sovereignty rather than the opposite, the international community should
intervene when we are dealing with action which involves attacks upon human rights and it’s
important to act in a balanced way between these two issues.

Finally, Mr. President, as the UK Foreign Office has stated in or around 1983, while commenting
on this nascent concept of R2P, that dubious agenda do always take the disguise of lofty
principles. We are of a strong conviction that this argument is valid to date. Thank you.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations, at
the United Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion on "From commitment
to implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
26 February 2016
Allow me to thank the President of the Assembly, the Secretary-General, and other speakers.

First of all, I would like to comment on Mr. Evans’ statement, in which he referred to my President
in a very disrespectful way. He may have forgotten that he is a guest here and he must be
respectful. He must respect whoever hosts him. However, this activist might still be reading from
the rules of history that have spread chaos in Africa, that have looted their resources and their
wealth, and therefore, he speaks as a Supreme, as if he is preaching to the people of Africa and
he has forgotten that these people are now free and they will no longer want to be oppressed
and occupied by states that would loot their resources once again.

The principle is noble. However, this is yet another tool for occupation. Everyone who delivered a
statement today, they had a common position. Therefore, what we see today is a monologue and
not a dialogue. Any attempt to actually apply this concept must be within a framework of
understanding. This will entrench the differences between member states.

Once again, I call on him to respect the forum of the United Nations. We represent our states
and our presidents. Therefore, we do not want to see any guests disrespecting our presidents.

Therefore, I call upon the Moderator of this dialogue to ensure that this happens because what
we heard is one point. This is one symphony that some states would like to hear. However, there
are other states that want to hear another symphony because this concept is still being debated.

There are no differences around the need to protect civilians. However, there are differences
around this very concept. Everything that has happened ever since has not served this noble
purpose. Some people want to actually manipulate states once again. This is yet another form of
occupation.

Let us debate this and I stress we must have a dialogue and not a monologue. What is
happening today is a monologue. It is a one-man show where they are talking about one point of
view without taking into consideration the points of view of other people