Statement delivered by Syria – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]

Thank you Chair. Member states at the International Summit ten years ago adopted the principle of the
Responsibility to Protect as a lofty tool to save civilians and spare them from the surge of war in the
framework of the national competence and the sovereignty of states concerned. However, unfortunately,
some influent states in this organization have distorted this lofty concept so as to make it a new tool and
a subterfuge to interfere in the affairs of state and gain their interest no matter what the price. This has
led some member states to take some initiatives and attempts to interpret R2P in a different concept, by
giving a new concept to it, which runs counter to Responsibility while Protecting. So the principle of
Responsibility to Protect, like other lofty concepts, has lost its credibility and its moral character because
it has been politicized, and because of a conflict of interest, bad intentions, hegemony and domination.

My country would like to say that the principle Responsibility to Protect against atrocities is the job of
concerned states under national sovereignty. Secondly, the principle of protection is to strengthen
national sovereignty rather than undermining it. This has not been fully respected and it has led to the
imposition of states to change their regimes by means of military invasion, occupation, support to terrorist
armed groups and armies, and terrorists who become as they are called “moderate national opposition”,
or some “non-state armed elements”. Thirdly, the outcome of these situations, in this selectivity and
politicization continue to take place to date.

The Secretary General, in one of his reports, mentioned the bad application of the R2P, just as is the case
in Libya. We must remind member states that in Libya, the country was transformed into a source of
terrorism, which is then exported to other states, particularly in Africa and my own country, Syria. Hence,
such practices have shown that the principle of protection is no longer a humanitarian principle as was
intended. Some states use it to interfere in the affairs of states and to practice and perpetrate terrorism
and murder, and these member states sap safety and security.

My delegation is aware of the last report of the Secretary General regarding the situation in my country.

I would like to re-affirm the following: the Secretary General’s report does not mention Israeli occupation
which continues on Arab territories, which is the humanitarian tragedy that should be exposed in this
context, because Israel, for decades now, has failed to respect the UN charter, particularly regarding the
solutions which should do away with the occupation by force of the territory of others. My country does
not have a civil war, but several hundreds and thousands of terrorist combatants from other nationalities
come to our country and are bombing and undermining the description of this issue by the Secretary
General, which is called a civil war.

My country continues to show its responsibilities regarding protection of our territory and our citizens
against armed groups which have attacked the state and its people. The national constitutions of all states
criminalize the use of arms except on the part of the army and institutions of a country which are
responsible for the protection of its populations. “Non-state armed groups” is an expression which does
not change the fact that all these terrorist groups we are mentioning are terrorist entities, which the
Syrian state has to deal with in its role as R2P. My country has, for decades, been providing assistance to
refugees and it would not have suffered from such a phenomenon, had it not owing to the assistance of

countries you are familiar with, which continue to support dozens of thousands of terrorist fighters from
abroad, who come to commit the most atrocious crimes in our country. Those regimes continue to
support terrorism in my country, and prevent us to get to a political solution and are imposing a unilateral
course of blockade, which affects the very lives of all Syrians who try to go abroad and are risking their
lives or go to other regions where they are protected by states.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of Syria to the United Nations, at the United
Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
25 February 2016
Syria would like to say that we are also commemorating the 5th year since the military
intervention in Libya. It would be logical that the UN adopt criteria so as to avoid abusive use
of the concept of Responsibility to Protect. Mr. Evans knows well that criteria were established
so as to use this concept. Now, why have we not heard of these criteria since then?
The Deputy SG spoke of the reputation of the UN and the fact that it was tarnished, but is this
not the responsibility of the countries that abused the idea of Responsibility to Protect. This
has also undermined international justice and the concept of the impunity of these countries.

You referred to the efforts we must make so as to fully define these concepts but these efforts
will be useless unless with strengthen the responsibilities of countries themselves in
Responsibility to Protect.

The UN should play a role in accordance with its Charter if we truly want to pursue consensus
amongst members States on this subject. The UN must be honest, must prove their honesty,
they must abstain from any politicization or selectivity any sort of dual standards. The UN must
also ensure that it does not lose the trust of countries. The silence of the UN on the Israeli
occupation crimes clearly show the policy of dual standards in this organization.

The idea of the Responsibility to Protect is a noble idea, its goal is to save lives, not to spread
chaos and destruction, as was the case in Libya. It is also not a tool that would allow illegal
interventions or a new means for a new colonization.

We also wish to say that we are in favor of the Russian and American initiative to cease
hostilities in Syria. We call on the UN force countries who are looking to increase the conflict
to immediately end their actions