Permanent Mission of the United Republic of Tanzania

STATEMENT BY

MR. TUVAKO N. MANONGI,
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS

AT AN INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE
OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ON RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

TUESDAY 06 SEPTEMBER, 2016

307 East 53rd Street, 5TH Floor, New York NY 10022
Tel. No. 212-697-3612 | Fax. No. 212-697-3618 Mr. President,

The significance of collective action and improved capacity to coordinate
early responses against genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity is, in our view, beyond question.

As a principle, Responsibility to Protect (R2P), is now enjoying a large
measure of political consensus. A consensus rooted on the admission that the
concept of State sovereignty also implies a responsibility to protect ones citizenry.

Failure to live up to this responsibility triggers a common or collective
responsibility shared by other States and other actors to intervene and protect.

This growing consensus influenced the African Union’s shift from the
principle of non-interference to non-indifference as currently reflected in Article
4(h) of the Constitutive Act. The provision grants the Union the right to intervene in
a Member State in respect of grave circumstances, namely; “war crimes, genocide,
and crimes against humanity.”

However, even when our vision and ideals are noble and outstanding,
translating them into concrete action remains a challenge we must overcome. As we
know all too well, these barriers or constraints are not only limited to Africa. They
are universal. Which is why this dialogue is an important engagement to hold.

Responsibility to Protect (R2P) will not be effective when solely left to a State
alone. Many States need to be capacitated in integrating the core values of R2P in
the integrity and character of a multiplicity of actors, at the local and state levels. In
addition, it must also be a responsibility among states at a regional and
international levels working with regional and international organizations.

R2P will also not be effective if the question of the Security Council’s veto is
not resolved. The hope that the application of the veto will always transcend
political differences amongst the five Permanent Members in cases of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is nothing but an illusion.

There must be a responsibility not to veto. Not to veto a resolution against genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity.

Finally, this Dialogue is seeking the right answers on how best we can
proceed to fill the gap between our commitments and our record of action.

Individual state actions alone will not be sufficient. We must strengthen the
collective responsibility of a host of actors - at the local, national, regional,
international and, yes, at the United Nations.

Tanzania’s Statement at the 2016 UN General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion,
From Commitment to Implementation: Ten Years of Responsibility to Protect
[Transcribed]
26 February 2016
Thank you, Mr. Moderator, and I think it’s important that we’re having this discussion. This tone
is also welcome. Its tone suggests its importance not only to the international community, but to
the humanity we all share.

Mr. Moderator, the adoption of the 2005 outcome document and the recognition of the
Responsibility to Protect was an important landmark, and therefore celebrating its 10 year
anniversary is an invaluable moment for reflection and recommitment.

I trust our panelists, especially Gareth Evans, will vouch to the claim often times made that RtoP
captures a simple and powerful idea. That the primary Responsibility to Protect people from
mass atrocity crimes lies primarily with the states. The states’ sovereignty implies a
responsibility, not a license to kill, but when a state is unable or unwilling to prevent such
atrocities, the international community has a collective responsibility to intervene. Yes, a simple
and powerful idea, nonetheless, let the truth be told. 10 years down, it stands that the simplest
of ideas is not so simple. This is why we wish to make two observations.

First, it is only right that we continue to focus on the General Assembly as we seek to enhance
national and global capabilities in combating impunity, and human rights violations. There are
bound to be frustrations and disappointments, clearly evidenced in this room, on the manner we
proceed in implementing RtoP. It is also evident that the General Assembly has an important
role for states to strengthen their prevention capabilities. Ironically, in many countries including
our own, national institutions, such in our case the Commission for Human Rights and Good
Governance, are less likely to obtain support from sources who only want to work with
non­governmental actors. That is not to say those non­governmental agencies do not have a
roll, they do. The truth is, as a tool for prevention, education is vital in nurturing norms and
practices for promoting good governance and law. Consequently, agencies with broader and
wider national reach deserve support as a framework of instilling norms, values, and principles.

We must focus on prevention of violations before they happen. It is pointless to adopt a
resolution that supports and reaffirms, but falls short of providing concrete and effective support
for measures for strengthening national capabilities for prevention. There is no substitute for
investing in education of prevention.

Secondly, and finally, it is equally imperative that we must equally focus on the decision­making
processes in the Security Council. In this regard, the decisions of the Council cannot escape
scrutiny. To date, it remains difficult to find justification for the council’s decision to intervene in
LIbya in 2011 and its content with nothing less than regime change, while remaining a spectator
in situations where the moral imperative for action was equally beyond doubt. RtoP should not

only be a guiding document in how sovereign governments treat their people, it should also be
about how the international community ought to respond. Convenience and appropriateness
should not be part of the equation. Our idealism should not cloud the failings taking place in the
Council that inhibit the full realization of what is otherwise an ideal principle. And those in the
council who can make a difference should perhaps renew their rhetoric hypocrisy about RtoP.

Regrettably, most the depressing and distressing reality has been our failure to overcome
complications that are driven by political considerations. This is the reality we must confront