Intervention at an informal interactive dialogue of the GA (3 minutes)
on Responsibility to Protect
10.00-13.00 hrs. Tuesday, 6 September 2016, Trusteeship Council Chamber
Mr. President,
Mass atrocity has been in an increasingly worrying trend with more frequency and
violence. Challenges in the protection of civilians have become more complex and
multifaceted. We need a collective and comprehensive approach to respond to such trendI therefore wish to thank you for organizing today’s timely informal interactive dialogue
on the Responsibility to Protec. I also wish to thank the Secretary General for his eighth
report on this issue which provides concrete fundamentals for further discussion.

Allow me to offer some key points that need our particular attentionMr. President,
First, Thailand attaches great importance to the protection of civilians. We reaffirms our supports
to the general concept of the R2P, provided that it applies to only the prevention of mass atrocities
which are genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, not to the change
of ruling regime nor political agenda. And it must be under a joint UN undertakings, not a
unilateral actionEarlier this year at the introduction of a GA draft resolution on R2P, we heard Member States’
clearly diverse views. Those who expressed concerns cited an example of the misuse of R2P
concept for political purpose and consequences of such misuse were tragic. Once the concept is
misinterpreted and misused, it will be difficult to reach common agreement and to materialize the
concept.

The first step to advance the R2P is to admit the fact that Member States still perceive the concept
differently. We must therefore fine tune and establish a convergence of common perception and
understanding among Member States. Their legitimate concerns need to be addressed carefully
through an open, inclusive and meaningful dialogue. What we need to discuss is how the
international community could guarantee that the R2P concept will serve its original purpose and
be operationalized in accordance with the UN CharterSecond, as rightly pointed in the Secretary General’s report, one of the key obstacles to
mobilize collective action to respond to mass atrocities effectively is the question of authority
to determine that such heinous crime needs a timely and decisive intervention including
military operation. Some questions are still left debatable. For instance, what are the criteria
for decisive action under Pillar 3? What will be the procedure to activate such intervention?
Will State’s consent be taken into account? These key sensitive issues remain a debate and require further consultations among Member
States. It is necessary to stipulate clear rules and procedures with preventive measures against
unilateral interventions, bearing in mind the principles of non-intervention in domestic affairs, UN
Charter and international law. We have already started the discussion but yet to concludeMy last point, Mr. President, as R2P is inextricably linked to and involved with the role of UNSC,
the Member States should therefore ensure the UNSC’s effectiveness, accountability, unity and
transparency in responding to mass atrocities