9 December 2016

United Nations Stands Ready to Help
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Address Dire Humanitarian Situation,
Deputy Secretary-General Tells Security
Council
Following are UN Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson’s remarks to the Security Council
on the situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in New York, today:
I welcome this Security Council meeting on the human rights situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. This is a matter of great concern that demands our
attention. The magnitude and scale of abuses suffered by the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea had been documented by the Commission of Inquiry in 2014.

The Commission noted that the violations “reveal a State that does not have any parallel in
the contemporary world”. The Commission’s recommendations were instrumental in
reframing the United Nations’ efforts to improve the country’s human rights situation. The
Commission of Inquiry concluded that crimes against humanity have been committed and
rightly called for accountability.

The Security Council carried this process further last week by adopting
resolution 2321 (2016). This was the first time the Council specifically requested the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect and ensure the “welfare and inherent
dignity” of people in its territory. The General Assembly, in its resolutions on this issue have
repeatedly encouraged the Security Council to ensure accountability, including by
considering to refer the situation in the country to the International Criminal Court.

The patterns of grave violations of human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea have repeatedly been established. The authorities have given no effective
commitment to remedy the situation. People inside the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea are unable to make their voices heard because of the restrictions and the risks they
face if they exercise their rights. The most vulnerable continue to suffer from a cruel
network of political prison camps, an exploitative economic system and widespread
discrimination based on social status.

Two days ago, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a report that
assessed the different ways families have been separated since the 1950-53 Korean
War. The report found that involuntary separation is not just the consequence of a war, but
also the result of structural forms of exclusion, impunity and disempowerment.

In addition, the country experiences a humanitarian emergency. Approximately 70 per cent
of the population of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — 18 million people — are
considered food insecure. A quarter of the population has inadequate access to health
services. A fifth of the population lacks access to clean water and proper sanitation. The
impact on children, whose developing bodies are vulnerable to lasting damage, is simply
ruinous. Stunting is a rampant phenomenon.

These persistent humanitarian needs are exacerbated by recurring natural disasters, such
as the floods that devastated the north of the country in September, affecting
600,000 people. In line with the “no one left behind” principle of the Sustainable
Development Goals, it is imperative to decouple geopolitical considerations from United
Nations humanitarian and development support to people in need.

Security Council resolution 2321 (2016) underlined that the measures imposed were not
intended to have adverse humanitarian consequences for the civilian population. I urge
members of the Council to ensure that the already critical humanitarian situation does not
deteriorate further due to such measures.

Funding for relief activities in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is essential, in
particular to ensure that vulnerabilities do not increase in the face of stricter
sanctions. Assistance has steadily declined over the past decade, preventing humanitarian
agencies from responding effectively to the needs of the most affected. About 145 million
dollars are required to address the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s critical
humanitarian needs. I count on Member States to support these life-saving activities.

History teaches us that serious human rights violations are warning signs of instability and
conflict. Abduction of foreign nationals, enforced disappearances and people fleeing
desperate situations all demonstrate the links between human rights, humanitarian crisis
and international peace and security. Any attempt to achieve lasting peace and stability
demands justice and redress for victims inside and outside the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

It is very difficult to obtain up-to-date and comprehensive information about human rights
developments in Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The information we have,
however, reveals a continuing pattern of serious human rights violations. And we see very
few, if any, signs of improvement.

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has obligations under international law. We call
on its Government to abide by them. But the international community also has collective
responsibilities: first, to protect the country’s population from the most serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights; second, to live up to the principle and
norm of the Responsibility to Protect; and third, to consider the wider implications of the
human rights situation for regional stability.

The United Nations has taken a number of steps recently to address the human rights
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The new Special Rapporteur
presented his report to the General Assembly in October. Also in October, the SecretaryGeneral issued his report to the General Assembly. The Third Committee has agreed on a
resolution which will be adopted by the General Assembly next month.

In response, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has maintained its strong
objections to country-specific resolutions and mandates. While expressing hope for
dialogue and cooperation on human rights, that country’s Permanent Mission said it will
“take all appropriate measures vis-à-vis the hostile acts against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea that become increasingly aggressive under the pretext of ‘human
rights’”.

During his ten years in office, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has made extensive efforts to
promote peace and reconciliation, as well as development and respect of human rights in
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We must remain committed to pursuing
peaceful, diplomatic and political paths forward to deal with this complex and dangerous
situation.

The United Nations will continue to work towards ensuring a genuine and lasting
improvement of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We stand ready to help in all possible ways. This could include human
rights dialogues, visits to the country with sufficient access to assess conditions on the
ground as well as cooperation initiatives and people-to-people contacts.

Let us use all the tools at our disposal — the Human Rights Council, the General Assembly,
the Security Council and United Nations and other international entities — to take action to
build a better future for the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Thank
you.

United Nations
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
New York
6 September 2016

Deputy Secretary-General's remarks at the Informal Interactive Dialogue on
"Mobilizing Collective Action: The Next Decade of the Responsibility to Protect" [as
delivered]
I am honoured to open this interactive dialogue with Member States on the responsibility to protect (RtoP). As you know,
this is a concept that has been a consistent priority of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and a principle that is close to my
heart.

The Secretary-General, who is now on travel, sends you his greetings as well as his appreciation for your contributions to
advance the responsibility to protect. He urges you to redouble your efforts to implement it and assures you of his
ongoing support.

For my part, as President of the General Assembly in 2005, I was proud to be part of the negotiations and adoption of the
historic commitment by Heads of State and Government at the World Summit to protect their populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

This commitment was a signature achievement for the United Nations. Much of it was already embedded in the
international human rights obligations of States. But the collective responsibility of the international community to act in
the face of atrocity crimes, as well as the imperative to protect populations by preventing such acts, strongly needed to be
articulated, afOrmed, and placed more prominently on the international agenda. Subsequent events have underlined the
need to live up to this important principle.

Since 2005, much has been accomplished. This annual General Assembly dialogue has made important contributions to
the development of the principle of RtoP. We have over the years seen the initial commitment deepen into broad
consensus on its core elements. We have seen concrete implementation plans to make the responsibility to protect a
‘living reality’. And we have seen an increasing focus on the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity in the General Assembly, the Security Council and the Human Rights Council.

We have also seen networks for atrocity prevention. A number of national and regional actors are developing prevention
agendas, often with the support of the United Nations.

Still, we continue to witness unconscionable brutality against civilians around the world. We see an intolerable disrespect
for international norms and standards, including the basic principles of international humanitarian law. Sadly, we have yet
to fully operationalize the responsibility to protect principle, agreed with such high hopes and expectations in 2005.

I would like to highlight two points from this year’s report of the Secretary-General which will be critical in overcoming the
barriers to implementation.

First, we must in practice demonstrate that we are serious about prevention. The call for prevention is not a rhetorical
call; it is a call to action to all States, organizations and other stakeholders. Effective prevention requires foresight and
serious analysis as well as constant attention, support and political will. It means integrating a prevention agenda into
national, regional and international frameworks for action. It also requires additional institutional capacity. I am glad to
see that the SDGs also contain elements relevant to peaceful societies and conYict prevention.

We all know that the window of opportunity is wider at the early stages of a crisis. There are more options for preventive
action and action is less costly and complicated in the early stages. Yet, we continue to respond to situations often only
when the window of opportunity starts to close. We fail to maximize in time the opportunities we have, using the range of
preventive tools at our disposal, not least listed in Chapter VI on PaciOc Settlements of Disputes of the UN Charter.

Of course, the responsibility to take preventive action is highest for those who have the greatest authority to act and those
who have the greatest inYuence in potential crisis situations. The Security Council would gain much by enhancing its
capacity and willingness to respond to early signs of a crisis. Closer interaction and exchanges between the Council and
UN human rights mechanisms and mandates are also critical.

To be effective, Member States should exercise their authority in the interests of populations at risk of atrocity crimes.

The protection of human lives must not be seen to be in contradiction to national interests. The Secretary-General’s
report underscores the need for unity of purpose within the Security Council and other inter-governmental bodies of the
UN around the Charter obligation of prevention. Look at Article 1 of Chapter I of the Charter.

Second, we need to be more effective in preventing the recurrence of atrocity crimes. Far too many countries, where there
is a risk or occurrence of atrocity crimes, have been tormented by them in their past history. Preventing the recurrence of
atrocity crimes is related to all three pillars of the responsibility to protect.

Support to national authorities is critical. We need to address root causes and build or strengthen the ways to counter
atrocity crimes – such as by inter-communal dialogue, reform of the security sector, and mechanisms for reconciliation
and transitional justice.

We need to invest in sustaining peace, with international assistance tailored to strengthen the resilience of States and
their capacity to fulOl their responsibility to protect. We should recall the recent historic adoption of identical resolutions
in the General Assembly and the Security Council on peacebuilding and the imperative to sustain peace. This is quite an
achievement which would not have been possible a few years ago.

I am pleased that today’s dialogue includes the two former Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on RtoP, Edward
Luck and Jennifer Welsh.

Thanks to Edward Luck, the RtoP was articulated as a three-pillar structure and an agenda was developed for partnership
with regional and sub-regional organizations. And thanks to Jennifer Welsh, we developed a Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes, which is now being frequently used by national, regional and international actors as a tool for prevention.

Here, let me also welcome our moderator today, Ivan Simonovic, as the next Special Adviser, taking up the position on 1
October. You have a strong record as a champion of human rights and RtoP. We look forward to working closely with you
in the time ahead – as we also will with your successor here in New York, Andrew Gilmour.

Finally, I would be remiss if I were not to pay tribute to my friend and colleague Adama Dieng who has for long made
invaluable contributions for the respect of international law and human dignity.

In closing, let me say that I, over the years since 2005, have valued highly the fruitful and engaging discussions at these
annual dialogues on RtoP in the General Assembly. The time has now come to seriously counter and confront crisis and
potential crisis situations. There are millions of people looking to the UN for help in time of dire need, conYict and
distress. In the name of humanity and in the spirit of the UN Charter, we must not fail them.

Deputy Secretary-General's remarks at General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion
on "From Commitment to Implementation: Ten Years of the Responsibility to Protect"
[as delivered]
26 February 2016
I thank the President of the General Assembly for convening this important meeting to mark the
start of the second decade of the Responsibility to Protect (R2P).

I am glad to see so many friends and colleagues involved and interested in the concept of the
Responsibility to Protect. I particularly want to salute former FM Gareth Evans for his groundbreaking work to make R2P a norm and political reality. I also warmly welcome Navi Pillay and
Edward Luck, like Gareth close friends and great champions of human rights and R2P. You have
a great panel discussion to look forward to.

Ten years after the adoption of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document, it is essential that
we review what has been achieved and what remains to be done.

Ten years ago, Member States identified the need to bridge the gap between legal commitments
to protect populations from genocide and crimes against humanity, and the continuing failures of
protection on the ground.

As President of the General Assembly at the time, I well remember those discussions.

The solemn commitment that gave birth to the responsibility to protect was not designed to be a
comfortable rhetorical restatement of common values.

So, ten years on, where do we stand?
Have we moved from commitment to delivery?
Not much, I would say, not sufficient. Looking around the world, we see a number of situations in
which populations are suffering horrendous abuses. Some of them may well constitute genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Individual states and the international community continue to fail in their responsibility to protect.

Too often, there is no responsibility. Too often there is no protection.

The damage to societies, to future generations – and to the reputation of the United Nations and
its values -- is far-reaching and long-lasting.

We know all of this too well, and we have known it far too long.

I am appalled at the alarming disregard for international human rights and humanitarian law that
we are seeing in this second decade of the 21st century.

Too many Member States are failing to live up to fundamental rules of international humanitarian
and human rights law.

And too many have yet to become Parties to the international conventions which set out the
framework for preventing and punishing the crimes identified by the principle of the responsibility
to protect.

Now, despite this sombre introduction, I want to register some progress.

The responsibility to protect has helped to generate a growing political understanding among
Member States on how to prevent and respond to atrocity crimes.

Through successive General Assembly dialogues since 2009, Member States have agreed that
prevention is at the core of the UN agenda. Our international action should employ the full range
of diplomatic, political and humanitarian measures. Such action must take place in accordance
with the United Nations Charter.

Discussions on the responsibility to protect in other United Nations inter-governmental fora have
replicated these points.

The conceptual, political and institutional development of the R2P constitutes constant work in
progress.

The responsibility to protect has also led to the development of new political commitment and
new institutional capacities. We see it in other international and regional organizations. We also
see it in international networks for the prevention of atrocity crimes.

Let us list some of them because it is pretty impressive. The Global R2P Focal Point Network,
the Regional Committee at the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region, the Latin
American Network on Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention, and the Global Action against
Mass Atrocity Crimes – all are actively enhancing our understanding of risk factors and sources
of national resilience.

They all aim to prevent a downward spiral towards systematic violence. They help identify ways
to assist States to better protect their populations.

The measure of our success is the extent to which we have been able to prevent atrocity crimes
or the escalation of such crimes.

Developments in Cote d’Ivoire, Guinea and Kenya count as successes.

But our collective response to the Syrian crisis has been a catastrophic failure. And the situation
in South Sudan is deeply troubling.

Special Advisers Adama Dieng and Jennifer Welsh are launching a research project this year
which is to draw conclusions about the combination of tools likely to make the most difference in
protecting populations at risk.

The results of this research based on a number of case studies can guide us in developing and
employing the different instruments we have at our disposal.

Let me here commend and thank Adama and Jennifer for their close and effective cooperation
and for their excellent contribution to our work.

I see three priorities for building on what we have achieved.

That means a genuine and wider political commitment to early action from all sides. We must act
early instead of waiting for disaster to occur.

Internally, within the United Nations system, our Human Rights Up Front initiative is an important
step in this direction. But it is crucial that our alerts and warnings land on fertile ground.

Second, when crimes against humanity occur, we need to respond faster and more
decisively. The evidence that we are not doing enough is painfully clear.

It should spur us all to do more in the enlightened self-interest of all concerned. There is a
common interest in avoiding disasters occurring and needing to launch peacekeeping operations
when all know we should have done more at the preventive stage.

Third, we should do more in peacebuilding – financially and politically.

When rebuilding is not done or fails, the risk of recurrence grows and gains as we have seen can
be quickly and tragically reversed – just look at South Sudan.

In such cases, we must maintain our engagement and learn from our past failures.

The Secretary-General has spoken of the need to instill a ‘culture of courage’ to ensure that
respect for human rights and international humanitarian law does not succumb to other
considerations.

At the beginning of the second decade of the responsibility to protect, it is imperative that the
international community unequivocally reaffirms the responsibility to protect of 2005.

We must work collectively to make the protection from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity a living reality.

This is an obligation to humanity and to the people we are to serve in the spirit of the Charter