Statement South Sudan Special Session on behalf of the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect
14 December 2016
Mr. President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect (Rwanda and The Netherlands).

We are deeply concerned about the situation in South Sudan and the heightened risk of mass atrocity crimes.

Since late October, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UN Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, and the UN Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan have all voiced their concern
regarding the rising incidents of hate speech, including by government officials, and the systematic targeting,
killings and forced displacement of the civilian population, including sexual violence against women and
girls.

As the UN Special Representative for the Prevention of Genocide said, many of the warning signals of
impending genocide are already there – an existing conflict, resort to polarized ethnic identities,
dehumanization, a culture of denial, displacement based on ethnicity and in some places indications of
systematic violations and planning. With the stalling of the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
current humanitarian crisis, a stagnating economy and the proliferation of arms, all of the ingredients exist
for a dangerous escalation of violence, warning in his own words that, “what began as a political conflict has
transformed into what could become an outright ethnic war.”
As the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan and the Special Adviser have stated, there is still time
to prevent escalation of violence towards genocide in South Sudan. In that regard, the Human Rights Council
and its mechanisms have a critical preventative role to play and we welcome the convening of this special
session.

The Transitional Government of National Unity bears the primary responsibility to protect its population
from mass atrocities. In this regard we welcome the cooperation of the Government with the Human Rights
Commission and other United Nations mechanisms and its consent to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force.

We call on the Human Rights Council:
•
•
•
•
•

To strongly condemn ethnically-fueled violence and hate speech and to continue to insist on
preventing further incitement to discrimination, hostility, and hatred that could lead to more
violence.

To strongly condemn the unprecedented levels of sexual violence in South Sudan and ensure prompt
investigation and accountability for all those responsible.

To call on the political leadership of South Sudan to immediately condemn and take steps to prevent
any act of discrimination, hostility, and hatred that could constitute incitement to violence.

To stress the importance of an inclusive political process, the urgent need to engage in both
community and national level dialogue and the establishment of the Commission for Truth, Healing
and Reconciliation by the Government foreseen in the peace agreement.

To call for the immediate establishment of the hybrid court as set out in the peace agreement to
ensure justice and accountability.

While stressing that the Government of South Sudan has the primary responsibility to protect its population,
other States, regional organisations and the international community can assist its protection efforts. In that
regard, there is an urgent need for strengthened cooperation with the African Union, IGAD and UNMISS in
order to move this process forward.

Finally we call on the Government of South Sudan to continue and fully cooperate with these processes, grant
unfettered humanitarian access and to facilitate the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.

Statement by the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect in
Geneva at the HRC 33 General Debate Item 10 – Technical assistance and
capacity-building

Mr. President,
I have the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect1.

Widespread and systematic abuses or violations of human rights often
serve as early warning signs of potential genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and/or crimes against humanity. As the High Commissioner
recently stressed, “Failure to prevent human rights violations weighs
unbearably on victims, and is profoundly destabilizing for States”.

The responsibility of states to take action to prevent atrocity crimes,
consistent with international law, is well established. The toolbox for such
action is wide-ranging and includes encouragement and assistance by the
Human Rights Council.

That is why today we wish to stress the key role of the Human Rights
Council to support technical assistance and capacity-building work in the
prevention of atrocity crimes. The prevention of atrocity crimes requires,
inter alia but not limited to, “sustained efforts to build the resilience of
societies (…) by ensuring that the rule of law is respected and that all
human rights are protected, without discrimination; by establishing
legitimate and accountable national institutions; by eliminating
corruption; by managing diversity, constructively; and by supporting a
strong and diverse civil society and a pluralistic media2”.

Putting an end to serious violations of human rights and atrocity crimes
should be seen as the beginning of a period of social renewal and
institutional capacity-building, aimed at making future re-lapse into
1

Netherlands, Rwanda, Botswana, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Tanzania, Bangladesh, Japan, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Argentina, Chile,
Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Uruguay, Belgium, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Czech Republic, Denmark,
European Union, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Norway, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, United States
2

Analysis Framework.

violence less likely. The second pillar of the Responsibility to Protect
highlights that “The international community has a responsibility to
encourage and assist States in fulfilling this responsibility”.

In this regard, the importance of capacity-building, early warning, and
accountable and inclusive national institutions cannot be overlooked. We
wish to underline the importance of technical cooperation, aimed at
assisting States, upon their request, in building and strengthening national
capacities that have a direct impact on the observance and enjoyment of
human rights.

In this respect, we commend the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for the early and flexible responses tailored to specific
situations in the context of its capacity building and technical assistance
work. The activities undertaken through its field presences can contribute
to assisting States to take appropriate legislative, administrative and other
measures, to prevent human rights violations and their potential
escalation into atrocity crimes or conflict. These activities can contribute
to creating enabling environments for strong domestic systems of
promotion and protection of human rights.

The integration of a human rights perspective into the work of United
Nations Country Teams and United Nations peacekeeping missions is
another positive development that can contribute to the prevention of
gross violations of human rights that can potentially lead to atrocity
crimes.

Today, more work is required to increase the support which can be
provided on the ground. We urge the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights to strengthen its preventative capacity, including through
further elaboration of its prevention toolkit and we encourage states to
fully cooperate with the Council, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and Special Procedure mandate holders.

Check against delivery

Statement on behalf of The Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect at the UN General Assembly

Informal Interactive on the Responsibility to Protect

Intervention by H.E. Karel J.G. van Oosterom
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands
to the United Nations

New York, 6 September 2016 Mr. President,

T have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect, co-chaired by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Rwanda. Liechtenstein has indicated that it does not want to be

associated with this joint statement.

The Group commends the Secretary-General and Deputy-Secretary-General for
their commitment to advancing R2P over the course of their respective terms.

Their leadership has been crucial in advancing the agenda and putting the plight of

the most vulnerable civilians up front.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our full support for the United Nations (UN)
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, and welcome the
Secretary-General’s decision to appoint Ivan Simonovic as his Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect.

Mr. President,

The adoption of R2P at the UN World Summit in 2005 was an historic commitment
made by all Member States.

In the ten years since, we have seen:

> The establishment and expansion of the Group of Friends, which consists of 50
members from every region of the world in New York and Geneva;

> The launch of a Global Network of R2P Focal Points, consisting of 55 member

states and the European Union, as well as other atrocity prevention networks;

> The inclusion of R2P in over 50 Security Council resolutions, including directly in
the mandates of a number of UN Peace Operations, and in over 15 resolutions at
the Human Rights Council; These are just some examples of the undeniable progress in implementing a norm
that commits the international community to do better to prevent and protect

populations from the most egregious international crimes.

While we recognize this progress, we must admit that in too many situations the
international community continues to fall short in upholding the Responsibility to
Protect.

The world is witnessing a distressing disregard for international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law.

Hospitals, schools, children, doctors, journalists and peacekeepers have become
targets in too many armed conflicts.

Our individual and collective commitment to the Responsibility to Protect vulnerable
populations from mass atrocity crimes is needed as much as ever.

Mr. President,

The Group of Friends would like to raise the following points in response to the
Secretary-General’s report.

These reports have expanded our collective understanding of the Responsibility to
Protect, and for that the Group is immensely grateful.

1. We fully support for the ‘three pillar’ approach articulated by the Secretary-
General in his inaugural report on R2P and emphasize that the three pillars
are mutually reinforcing and non-sequential.

We reiterate our call for the full and effective implementation of all three
pillars and reiterate our intent to strengthen investment in prevention and to

ensure more timely and decisive response to early warning signs. 2. Regarding the third pillar, we recall paragraph 139 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document, where the international community reiterated
its readiness to take collective action, in a timely and decisive manner,
through the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter, including
Chapter VII, on a case-by-case basis and in cooperation with relevant
regional organizations as appropriate, should peaceful means be inadequate
and national authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The
links between the Human Rights Council and Security Council should be
strengthened to improve early warning and early action.

This is precisely why in November 2015 the Group of Friends was launched in
Geneva, and why we are working between the membership in New York and
Geneva to realize this, including through exploring the important role of
Geneva-based institutions and mechanisms for prevention.

3. The Group calls for R2P to be moved onto the formal agenda of the General

Assembly.

4. We value the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes as a useful guide for
assessing the risk of atrocity crimes.

It can serve as an important tool for mainstreaming atrocity prevention in
the UN, including in relevant UN Peace Operations, as well as assisting
Member States to strengthen their own capacities.

5. It is in the world’s interest to have a Security Council that responds in an
early and appropriate manner to situations where populations might face the
risk of mass atrocity crimes.

In line with the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front initiative, we also
encourage the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on R2P to
be invited to brief the Security Council more regularly. 6. Accountability for mass atrocity crimes is among the most effective ways of
preventing their recurrence.

We strongly encourage States to ratify or accede to the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and also encourage
consideration by Member States to ratify other relevant international legal

treaties.

7. The Secretary-General’s call for the expansion of atrocity prevention
networks is an important one.

We welcome the holding of the 6™ Annual Meeting of the Global Network of
R2P Focal Points in South Korea in June and commend the 55 Member States
and the EU for appointing R2P Focal Points.

8. Finally, we recognize the important role of civil society in supporting the
advancement of R2P.

In particular, we would like to thank the Global Centre for the Responsibility
to Protect for their invaluable role as Secretariat of the Group of Friends.

I will conclude, Mr. President, with a question for the panelists:

Can you elaborate on concrete and viable examples of how the next Secretary-
General of the United Nations can continue to advance the Responsibility to Protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity?

I thank you, Mr. President..

Statement by the Group of Friends1 of the Responsibility to Protect in Geneva at the Interactive
Dialogue with UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, 10 March 2016
I have the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect, which is co-chaired by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Rwanda.

The Group of Friends welcomes the convening of this Interactive Dialogue with the High Commissioner
and would like to take this opportunity to thank the High Commissioner for his commitment to the
promotion and protection of all human rights, and for the tireless work of his Office
The Group of Friends in Geneva was formally established in November 2015 on the occasion of the 10th
anniversary of the 2005 World Summit, recognizing the crucial role that Geneva-based organizations
play in highlighting the importance of preventing mass atrocity crimes through capacity building and
early warning. The Membership of the Group of Friends includes over fifty delegations from every region
of the world.

The adoption of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document, which recognized the Responsibility to
Protect, reflected a historic commitment by the United Nations and its Member States regarding the
protection of populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Widespread and systematic abuses or violations of human rights or violations of international
humanitarian law often serve as early warning signs of potential genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and/or crimes against humanity.

We therefore note with appreciation the Secretary General’s intent to develop a preventive approach
that would focus on averting large scale violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law, which could amount to genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and/or
crimes against humanity. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights plays a key role in this
regard by alerting the United Nations system and the international community to human rights
violations and abuses and violations of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, the work of the
Office contributes to effective and timely action aimed at preventing the commission of such acts: in
institution building, technical assistance, early warning capacity building, best practice advice and
persistent attention to warning signs.

The Responsibility to Protect can significantly contribute to the preventive work of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, other relevant Geneva-based institutions and mechanisms, as well as
non-governmental organizations.

The Group of Friends takes this opportunity to express its full support to the work of Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. Mr High Commissioner, we are encouraged by your personal support
and broad experience in the field of prevention and we wish to deepen our engagement with you and
your Office with the objective of strengthening our individual and collective capacity to prevent
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. We would welcome your views on
how to further implement RtoP within the UN system.

1

Netherlands, Rwanda, Botswana, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Tanzania,
Banglandesh, Japan, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Uruguay, Belgium, BosniaHerzegovina, Czech Republic, Denmark, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechenstein, Luxembourg, Norway, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, United States.

Statement by the Group of Friends1 of the Responsibility to Protect in Geneva at
the Informal Interactive Dialogue with Under-Secretary-General Mr. Adama
Dieng, Special Adviser to Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, 3
March 2016

I have the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, which is co-chaired by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
Republic of Rwanda.

The Group of Friends in Geneva was formally established in November 2015 on the occasion of
the 10th anniversary of the 2005 World Summit, recognizing the crucial role that Geneva-based
organizations play in highlighting the importance of preventing mass atrocity crimes through
capacity building and early warning. The Membership of the Group of Friends mirrors that of
the equivalent Group in New York and includes over fifty delegations from every region of the
world.

The Group of Friends would like to thank Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for his presentation on the activities of his office.

The adoption of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document, which recognized the
Responsibility to Protect, reflected a historic commitment by the United Nations and its
Member States regarding the protection of populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. The Group of Friends reaffirms its enduring and
collective commitment to RtoP as reflected in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World Summit
Outcome Document.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our full support to the work of the Joint Office of the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect. The Special
Advisers can and do act in an early warning capacity by drawing attention to situations that
could result in genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing, therefore
contributing to preventive efforts. We also encourage the Special Advisers to continue their
efforts to mainstream the Responsibility to Protect in the United Nations system, including
through enhanced cooperation with the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms.

We would like to highlight the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes of the Office of the
Special Advisers, which can be a useful guide for assessing the risk of atrocity crimes, including
genocide, and could serve as an important tool for mainstreaming atrocity prevention in the
United Nations. The Framework can also be useful in assisting regional mechanisms and States
to strengthen their respective regional and national capacities and strategies.

Furthermore the Group of Friends encourages States to highlight their domestic efforts to
address risks associated with atrocity crimes in relevant human rights mechanisms.

The Group of Friends further notes with appreciation the Secretary General’s intent to develop a
preventive approach that would focus on averting large scale violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian law, which could amount to genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and/or crimes against humanity.

On the occasion of this dialogue, the Group of Friends would like to emphasize the importance
of the full and effective implementation of the Responsibility to Protect. We recommit ourselves

to the protection of populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, and encourage all member states to do the same.

Mr. Dieng, the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect in Geneva looks forward to
cooperating with you and would be grateful for your suggestions on how to further mainstream
RtoP in Geneva.

1

Netherlands, Rwanda, Botswana, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Tanzania,
Banglandesh, Japan, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Uruguay, Belgium, BosniaHerzegovina, Czech Republic, Denmark, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechenstein, Luxembourg, Norway, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, United States.

Statement on behalf of The Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect at the Thematic
Event Convened by the President of the General Assembly “From Commitment to Implementation:
Ten Years of the Responsibility to Protect”

Mr. President of the General Assembly,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the 50 Members of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect (R2P), co-chaired by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of
Rwanda.

The Group of Friends thanks the President of the General Assembly for convening this important event to
mark the beginning of the second decade of the Responsibility to Protect.

Mr. President, the adoption of R2P at the United Nations (UN) World Summit in 2005 was an historic
commitment to prevent and protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. The Group of Friends reaffirms its enduring commitment to paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document on the Responsibility to Protect.

We welcome the considerable and undeniable progress that has been made since the 2005 World
Summit in the development and institutionalization of the Responsibility to Protect. Many member states,
as well as regional and sub-regional organizations, have made considerable strides in upholding the
Responsibility to Protect.

We have recognized that truly meeting our responsibilities requires us to employ a broad range of political
and diplomatic efforts on a case-by-case basis. Recognizing that impunity may fuel further atrocities, the
pursuit of accountability for crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide must form part of such
efforts.

We note that 51 countries and the European Union have appointed National Focal Points as part of the
Global Network of R2P Focal Points, and encourage all Member States to join this growing Global
Network.

From the establishment of the UN Office on Genocide Prevention and R2P to the development of the
Human Rights up Front Action Plan, the UN Secretariat has also enhanced its capacity to address
atrocity crimes. We encourage all states to support the work of the UN Office on Genocide Prevention
and R2P, and welcome the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, which can be a useful guide for
assessing the risk of atrocity crimes. The Group of Friends also welcomes the role of civil society in
assisting Member States to uphold the Responsibility to Protect.

The UN Security Council has adopted 43 resolutions referencing R2P, including 13 in 2015 – the most
ever in one year. The Human Rights Council has also referenced R2P in 14 of its resolutions. We further
applaud the launch of the Group of Friends of R2P in Geneva, and look forward to joining efforts to
strengthen the links between New York and Geneva for prevention.

While we highlight and mark these important strides, we must also lament on our collective failures to fully
and effectively uphold R2P. Acts that may constitute genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity are currently occurring in many crises around world. We have also witnessed the rise of
non-State armed groups that seek to spread their violent extremism and perpetrate atrocity crimes as a
matter of policy.

In our collective attempts to confront these atrocities, R2P has never been more relevant. As we begin
the second decade of R2P, we must urgently move from commitment to implementation.

Paragraph 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document stressed the need for the General
Assembly to continue consideration of R2P. In this regard, the Group of Friends welcomes the draft UN
General Assembly resolution on the Responsibility to Protect, circulated by Australia, Botswana, Brazil,
Denmark, Ghana, Guatemala, the Republic of Korea and Slovenia.

We thank the members of this truly cross-regional group for their efforts, and welcome its efforts to work
toward a balanced text which emphasizes the importance of prevention and the inter-connection between
R2P, peacebuilding and the broader human rights and civilian protection agendas. We also welcome the
strong support of the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect.

The Group of Friends believes that now is an opportune time for the General Assembly to assume this
responsibility by considering the adoption of a resolution that supports R2P and moves it on to the formal
agenda.

We understand that there may be outstanding issues held by Member States regarding the
implementation of R2P, on a case-by-case basis. By moving R2P onto the formal agenda we firmly
believe these substantive issues will be discussed in a comprehensive manner taking into consideration
the crucial and diverse views of the entire membership of the United Nations.

The Group of Friends therefore emphasizes the importance of considering this resolution, and
encourages all member states to do the same.

Finally, we welcome the first ever Arria Formula meeting of the UN Security Council on the Responsibility
to Protect and non-state armed groups held on 14 December 2015. R2P places a particular responsibility
on the members of the Security Council. The Group of Friends advocates for timely and decisive action
by the Security Council in order to prevent or end atrocity crimes.

We recommend more frequent and regularized briefings to the Council by the Special Advisers on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, and also encourage the Security Council to
convene a meeting to discuss R2P and mass atrocity prevention in 2016.

By way of conclusion, Mr. President, the Group of Friends has three questions for the esteemed panelists
on accelerating the implementation of R2P:
1) How can the UN and its member states increase political support and political will to implement
the Responsibility to Protect?
2) In terms national capacities, what are some of the most effective measures member states can
take to strengthen their own resilience to mass atrocity crimes? And what regional or international
support might be best merited to support this?
3) Regarding protecting civilians, ten out of sixteen UN peace operations currently have this function
at the core of their mandates. How can the United Nations tangibly strengthen the protection of
civilians, particularly from atrocity crimes like those under the R2P framework, in the context of
these operations?
I thank you, once again, Mr. President of the General Assembly