Statement by Ambassador Matthew Rycroft, UK
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, on the
Responsibility to Protect.

Thank you very much Mr. President, and thank you to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the Responsibility to Protect. It’s very strong
focus on the challenges of implementing that doctrine are especially
welcome, and I would like to reaffirm at the outset the United Kingdom’s
commitment to implementing the R2P doctrine, and I would like to thank
all of the panellists for everything that they do, and continue to do, on
such an important global issue.

Responsibility to Protect is a global issue that can be seen on virtually
every item that comes to the Security Council’s agenda. It can also be
seen on the faces of the thousands being forced to flee from Juba in
July, or the hundreds of thousands of poor civilians in Syria who are
besieged or under attack in Aleppo. So we must redouble our efforts on
R2P for their sakes.

I think there are three areas that deserve special attention.

First, there has been, as others have said, a stark increase in atrocities
over recent years. Early warning must be met with early action. The
Security Council has failed too many times in this regard. The findings of
the OPCW-UN Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria show just how
horrific the consequences can be when we fail to prevent such conflict,
in that instance with the use of chemical weapons against civilians of
Syria by the Asad regime.

Second, international humanitarian law, international human rights law,
and international refugee law are the foundation on which the R2P
doctrine is built. And Member States, every single one of us, must meet
those obligations so that civilians living in conflict today have a chance to
live in a peace that they deserve tomorrow. And I hope that this call to
action can be echoed by everyone in this room. And crucially, that action
can then follow words.

In the face of ongoing atrocities, the Security Council must be able to
act. Nearly 6 in every 10 countries around the world have signed the

ACT Code of Conduct, calling for restraint of the veto for cases of mass
atrocities, and I’m proud that the UK is one of them.

My final point is about one of the greatest terrorist threats of our time.

From Mosul to Munich, Orlando to Aleppo, Paris to the mountainside of
Sinjar. Da’esh and those who share their hateful ideology have
demonstrated, in the most callous ways that they pose a significant
threat to innocent civilians.

Part of our Responsibility to Protect lies in ensuring that those who seek
to harm civilians know that impunity is not an option. In July, British
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson announced plans for a UK-led
campaign to hold Da’esh to account. I am pleased to say it today we will
officially launch that campaign during the high level week of UNGA (UN
General Assembly) this year.

Holding these heinous individuals to account will send a strong signal to
those who seek to harm civilians. It’s part of our commitment, not only to
the doctrine of the Responsibility to Protect but also, and more
importantly, to the survivors and the victims and those who have lost
loved ones to Da’esh’s brutality.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of the United Kingdom to the United Nations, at the
United Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion on "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President of
the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
26 February 2016
Mr. Moderator,
I want to begin by thanking the President of the General Assembly for holding the discussion to
mark this important anniversary – the 10th – on the responsibility to protect and if I may, I want to
thank you for the way that you are moderating the sessions and turning it into something much
more interactive and therefore useful than we are sometimes used to at the United Nations.

The United Kingdom has been a strong advocate of the responsibility to protect all along and we
are very proud to recommit to that support today. We very warmly welcome the strong role
that each of our panelists has been playing in the implementation of RtoP and the role of so
many member states. I, in particular, welcome the comments made by the European Union
and the Friends of RtoP.

We have this moment now where we can take stock of how far we have come and reflect on the
successes as well as the challenges and to look forward to the next 10 years. It is a moment to
think about how best to strengthen the mechanisms that we have at our disposal to help prevent
and respond to mass atrocities when they continue to occur. The UK will continue to play our
part. We’ve recently agreed a new strategic, security, and defense review, which amongst other
things puts the responsibility to protect at the center of what we are doing continuing to drive
toward global improvements. We will strengthen our own approach to the prevention of mass
atrocities. We will work to improve our analysis of risk situations and we will continue to
encourage greater and more effective international coordination in situations that relate to
potential or on-going mass atrocities.

To pick up the point that Navi Pillay made recently, the human rights interface with peace and
security is very well embedded now and the Secretary-General of the United Nations has played
a very effective role in that embedding, including through his very welcome initiative on Human
Rights up Front.

Thinking about the challenges ahead and the current challenges to protection, we have to start
with Syria. That is the biggest protection issue facing us and it is where more civilians continue to
be killed and continue to be forced to flee their country. We welcome the agreement between the
US and Russia on the cessation of hostilities which the Security Council will be voting on this
afternoon. It is absolutely crucial that the political negotiations can resume as soon as possible.

We need, in short, to turn words into action and to ensure that there is a significant change in
behavior by the Syrian regime and its backers so that civilians in Syria can no longer suffer from
all of those indiscriminate attacks.

Finally, in terms of what we can do, we can try to improve early warning; we can try to turn that
early warning into early action; and we can all sign up to the ACT Code of Conduct that commits
us never to vote against credible security action to prevent and respond to mass atrocities. I am
very proud that the UK has not used our veto at all since 1989 and I am very proud, as a
Permanent Member of the Security Council, that we have signed up to that Code of Conduct.

Finally, I would encourage everyone to think about what practical action can we each take to
support a united approach when we do have early warning of impending conflicts and crises