An

Say ee

Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to the United Nations

September 6, 2016
INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

In his address to the Stanley Foundation Conference on the Responsibility to Protect
(R2P), in New York on 18 January 2012, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon stated:

In 2011, history took a turn for the better. The responsibility to protect came of
age; the principle was tested as never before (...) We gave hope to people long
oppressed. In Libya (...) by our words and actions, we demonstrated that human
protection is a defining purpose of the United Nations in the twenty-first century.

Security Council authorized intervention in Libya did not put an end to violence and had
the unintended effect of exacerbating tensions on the ground and causing more harm
than good to the very same civilians it was supposed to protect. It soon became clear
that the interventions’ goal was not the protection of civilians but regime change.

Furthermore, large quantities of weapons and ammunition from the conflict, including
surface-to-air-missiles and man-portable air defense systems, found their way to
neighboring countries, exacerbating insecurity, organized crime and terrorism in the
region.

Rather than questioning whether military intervention may do more harm than good,
many R2P proponents often argue that the real risk comes from too few military
interventions. This rather causal approach to military intervention ignores the potential
for escalating violence, civilian casualties, damage to infrastructure, and the many
potential negative effects associated with the use military force.

The centrality of military intervention in R2P is obvious when one considers that the
coercive option is the only one of the three pillars that is widely funded and functional.

For example, bombing Libya cost approximately 1 billion dollars and that is just the
incremental cost, because the forces were already funded and trained. That is about 13
times more than what was spent in reconstructing the country. In the meantime, the
Peacebuilding Fund faces severe challenges to raise just $100 million. What we are trying to say is that rather than unhelpfully pitting two fundamental,
overriding principles of international law, non-intervention and the protection of human
rights,against each other and focusing on building a last resort option for when all else
fails, there is a dire need to devote all attention, energy and resources to ensuring that
the system does not fail to begin. with. But there seems to be no real commitment to do
this and thus the existing funding gap for prevention and sustaining peace in this
Organization.

More than ten years have gone by since paragraphs 138 and 139 were adopted.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding have been reviewed openly and transparently. The
same should be done with R2P and so we call on the PGA to convene an open ended
working group to review the responsibility to protect with a view to adopting
simultaneous resolutions in the General Assembly and the Security Council by this time
next year.

Statement delivered by the Delegation of Venezuela to the United Nations, at the United
Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion "From commitment to
implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
25 February 2016
In 2012, the SG, in his address to the Stanley Foundation Conference on the Responsibility
to Protect, said: “In 2011, history took a turn for better. The Responsibility to Protect came of
age, the principle was tested as never before. We gave hope to the people long oppressed.

In Libya, by our words and actions we demonstrated that human protection is a defining
purpose of the United Nations in the 21st century”.

Now we know that the Security Council authorized intervention in Libya did not put an end to
violence and had the unintended effect of exacerbating tensions on the ground and causing
more harm than good to the very same civilians it was supposed to protect. It soon became
clear that the intervention’s goal was not the protection of civilians but regime change.

Furthermore, large quantities of weapons and ammunition from the conflict, including antiaircraft artillery, surface-to-air missiles and man portable air defense systems, found their way
to neighboring countries, exacerbating insecurity and terrorism in the region to this very day.

Now, rather than questioning whether military intervention may do more harm than good, many
Responsibility to Protect proponents continue to argue that the real risk comes from too few
military interventions. Now, this rather casual approach to military intervention, to the use of
force ignores the potential for escalating violence, civilian casualties, damage to infrastructure
and many potential negative effects of the use of military force.

The centrality of military intervention in Responsibility to Protect is obvious when one
considers that many of the non-military elements of the concept are already present in other
instruments of the UN. There is a significant overlap between Responsibility to Protect’s
prevention agenda and the toolbox of traditional preventative and peacebuilding practices that
have been part of this organization long before the concept ever emerged.

Furthermore, when we focus so much on military intervention, even as a last resort, it tends
to inhibit meaningful reflection on prevention. In a concept where the coercive option that is
widely funded and functional it becomes, maybe by defect the only functional option. For
example, tens of billions of dollars were spent on bombing Libya to oblivion, but we know the
peacebuilding fund faces serious challenges just to raise 100 million.

In order to achieve real progress to prevent conflict, in all its forms, we have to put military
intervention on the side. And, in this regard, we wish to welcome the ongoing consultations on
the importance of peacebuilding before the emergency, during and after the conflict. We
understand that not everyone shares this view, but we see that we’re pitting one internationally
agreed principle, non-intervention, against another principle, the protection of human rights.

And, when we focus so much on building this last resort option for when all else fails, we
devote the attention to the wrong place.

We should devote our attention and our energy to insuring that the system never fails to begin
with. Now this message is not as attractive as military intervention and it’s much harder to
achieve, but it is also, we believe, much more likely to succeed in building a lasting, sustainable
peaceful world