STATEMENT
at the Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Report of the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect: “Responsibility of States to protect their populations by preventing
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity through appropriate and
necessary means”
11 September 2013

Mr. President,
At the outset, let me express my gratitude for this timely opportunity to address the issue of
the responsibility to protect the civilians by preventing genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity through appropriate and necessary means, and more
importantly – to foresee the ways to increase the effectiveness of enhanced efforts from the
UN community in this regard. Herein, I would like to also stress that Georgia welcomes the
appointment of Ms. Jennifer Welsh as the Special Adviser of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral and stands ready to cooperate with her to support the successful implementation of
her mandate.

While reflecting on the importance of our endeavors, we have to stress again the urgent need
to effectively address the needs of the innocent population in war-affected areas, a great part
of which are deliberately targeted for ethnic, religious, political or other pretexts. As we
speak, millions of people worldwide still suffer from genocide, war crimes and ethnic
cleansing and its consequences, in most cases, being deprived of their fundamental rights and
freedoms, separated from their families and expelled from the places of their permanent
residence. In this context, the UN has a primary role in undertaking immediate actions to
protect civilians and ensure their basic rights.

We condemn the violence against civilians in Syria, the culmination of which was the use of
chemical weapons and deplore the death of more than 100 thousand people. We believe that
the protection of the civilians should be the highest priority for each Government and the
entire international community. Georgia welcomes and supports readiness of the
international community to play a more active role in resolving humanitarian crisis in Syria.

Unfortunately, Syria is not the only place in the world where such atrocities take place. Here
I cannot but say few words about the situation in my own country, where the Government
of Georgia cannot provide security and protection of the population in the occupied regions
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. These people, living under detrimental conditions of foreign
occupation and ongoing process of ethnic cleansing, are deprived their fundamental rights
and freedoms, including but not limited to the continuous denial to return to their
homelands and reunifying with their families and restrictions to the freedom of movement

and the right to education in native language.

Moreover, occupying forces continue to aggravate the situation through their activities on
daily basis. The illegal installation of barbwire fences along the Administrative Boundary
Line significantly affects the livelihoods of the local population, divides families and
communities, and prevents people-to-people contacts. Such alarming developments compel
the local residents to leave their permanent places of residence, thus, creating a new
generation of internally displaced persons.

The grave security and human rights situation in Georgia’s occupied regions illustrates an
urgent necessity of international mechanisms on the ground. After the unilateral blockage of
the mandate of the UN monitoring mission in Georgia in 2009, the vacuum in terms of
international presence have not been overcome. As a result of artificial barriers, the
establishment of international security arrangements and human rights monitoring
mechanisms has not been materialized. The EUMM – the only international mission on the
territory of Georgia – still lacks the possibility to thoroughly implement its mandate and
monitor the situation inside the occupied regions of Georgia. It is imperative that the
conflict-affected population is provided with unhindered humanitarian aid and the relevant
international actors are allowed to carry out their activities according to their respective
mandates.

I would like to underline that in the circumstances, when the central Government of
Georgia is denied de facto control over its regions, the overall responsibility for security
situation rests solely with the state exercising effective control.

Mr. President,
Georgia fully shares the requirements of the Report of the UN Secretary-General of July 8,
2013 on the Responsibility to Protect: State responsibility and prevention and we express our
readiness to implement it. Moreover, in my country the numerous measures have been taken
for the prevention of massive crimes. Recently, Georgia designated a R2P Focal Point as we
believe that the coordination of intra-governmental and inter-governmental efforts to
mainstream R2P is essential. The Criminal Code of Georgia plays the important role to
prevent crimes such as genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. The Government
of Georgia believes that building the independent and democratic state is the most effective
way to achieve prosperous future for the reunited Georgia.

From its side, Georgia stands ready to contribute to concerted international efforts and
ensure more effective protection of the civil population by preventing genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. Georgia also remains committed to assume an
active role in the strengthening of international security in the region and the out world