INDIA

 

Please check against delivery

Statement

By
India

at
The Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Report of the
Secretary-General
on Responsibility to Protect: State Responsibility and

Prevention

New York 11 September 2013

 

Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations
235 East 43rd Street, New York, NY 10017 * Tel: (212) 490-9660 ° Fax: (212) 490-9656
E-Mail: india@un.int « indiaun@prodigy.net  Mr. President

Thank you for convening this interactive dialogue on the “Responsibility to Protect:
State responsibility and prevention”. | am confident that today’s deliberations would
significantly contribute towards exchanging views on measures that can be taken by Member
States on this issue.

Mr. President

It is important to recall that the 2005 World Summit outcome document had clearly
recognized that it was the responsibility of each State to protect its populations from four
crimes namely genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, and to
prevent the occurrence thereof.

Mr. President,
We would emphasize three issues regarding R2P:

First, the R2P must remain confined to the four crimes identified by our leaders in
2005, i.e., genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity. We have
the Geneva Conventions which provide the bulwark of international humanitarian law. Also,
a more interactive peer review process in the Human Rights Council has the potential to flag
problem areas which may need concerted action by the states concerned with support of the
international community, if required and as appropriate. The creation of the Human Rights
Council provides the international community with a specialized mechanism to monitor and
take appropriate action on human rights violations.

Second, the default response of the international community cannot be coercive
measures, including under Chapter VII of the Charter.

Third, R2P must not become a Lovl in Lhe hands of the powerful to pressurize weaker
states, and bring about regime change. Resort to Chapter VII, particularly Articles 41 and 42,
may be taken only after serious and genuine efforts at the pacific settlement as set out in
the UN Charter have failed. Even while applying Chapter VII, the use of force should be
considered as a measure of last resort. Any action involving R2P must be taken under the
auspices of the UN and not outside the UN framework.

Mr. President,

We believe that actions under responsibility to protect should be based on
impartiality, neutrality and proportionality. In conflict situations, there must be push for early political engagement with the parties concerned. Response of the international
community must be necessarily calibrated and must stress, at all times, dialogue and
peaceful resolution. Moreover, there have to be inbuilt mechanisms for monitoring and
reporting measures taken by the Member-States as well as course correction depending on
how the situation concerned evolves on the ground. In this context, responsibility while
protecting (RWP), as proposed by Brazil, is equally important. If R2P is to regain the respect
of the international community, it has to be anchored in the concept of RwP.

Mr President

The United Nations and its Member States, and regional or sub-regional organizations
must be there to offer assistance, as required by the State, including capacity building, to
strengthen such policies and programmes, which must be national owned.

The spread of education, economic growth, equal opportunities, social coherence,
gender equality, religious tolerance, and adherence to the rule of law nationally and
internationally are factors that can contribute to help prevent atrocity crimes.

Mr. President

Finally, | would like to emphasize that the effectiveness of the implementation of R2P
is linked to the balanced and impartial discharge of their responsibilities and obligations by
Member States under the UN Charter. The reform of the United Nations governance system
in tune with the contemporary realities will go a long way in ensuring this changed dynamics
which is critical for the successful implementation of R2P