Je vous remercie. Unofficial translation
Mr. Moderator,
Luxembourg welcomes the holding of this fifth dialogue of the General Assembly, which gives us
the opportunity to highlight the responsibility to protect, at a time when the attention of the world
public opinion rightly focuses on Syria. The more than one hundred thousand deaths caused by the
war in Syria and the millions of people affected in Syria and the neighboring countries are
unfortunately the result of our collective failure to prevent criminal atrocities committed on a large
scale and with increasing intensity. This failure should however not lead us to give up. The Security
Council must now assume its responsibilities. And we must breathe new life into the concept of
responsibility to protect.

In this context, I welcome the new Special Adviser, Ms. Jennifer Welsh. As a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, and as a member of the Group of Friends on Responsibility to
Protect, Luxembourg will spate no effort to support you in your effortsLet me make three brief pointsThe first one is on preventionThe Secretary-General's report lists a series of appropriate prevention measures, based on the
positive experiences on every continent. Europe’s example shows how regional organizations can
help States to prevent attocities through mutual and reciprocal control. The role of regional
organizations was central to the debate of 2011. We believe that this role should be explored further
during the follow-up meeting which has been proposed by the Secretary-General. It is crucial that
the discussion continues, and that it involves all stakeholders, including civil society.

Accountability applies to all pillars of the responsibility to protect. International commissions of
inquiry, fact-finding missions and referrals to the International Criminal Court have a dissuasive and
preventative nature. These measures are part of the international community’s toolbox and must be
used appropriately. For this reason, Luxembourg has been advocating since January for a referral of
the situation in Syria to the ICCTo implement the responsibility to protect, all actors in the United Nations system must play their
Pp Pp P y play
part. The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has a role to play, insofar as it aims to create a lasting
peace and to prevent the resurgence of conflicts. The PBC strengthens national resilience by
3 supporting countries such as Burundi, Guinea and Guinea-Bissau on the path of national
reconciliation and the strengthening of State institutions, for example by supporting security sector
reform,
Mr. Moderator,
In conclusion, we hope that we will be able in the future to overcome ideological divisions and to
focus on the concrete implementation of the responsibility to protect on the ground