PERMANENT MISSION OF MEXICO
STATEMENT BY THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MEXICO TO THE
UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATION, Jorge Montano, IN DEBATE
INTERACTIVE ON THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

New York, September 11, 2013
Mr. president:
My delegation wishes to thank the President of the General Assembly to convene
This debate and the distinguished panelists who with their interventions have
set the tone of this important discussion.

We also thank the Secretary General for his report,
focused on the first pillar of the Responsibility to Protect, ie the
responsibility of each State to prevent atrocities committed against their
population.

Mr. president:
There is no doubt that the heart of the Responsibility to Protect is precisely the
prevention, it is the only way to prevent people suffer atrocities,
holding them before they occur or making no recurrence where where and
They occurred. In this regard, the report of the Secretary-General provides a good point
starting to identify potential risk factors that may
triggering a humanitarian crisis. The more we know and understand the
causes that lead to conflict, better able to prevent and respond to this scenario
potential.

one

Perhaps the biggest challenge in prevention is so broad spectrum of application and
It is representing cross. It is therefore correct the distinction made by the Secretary
General in his report, including conflict prevention and prevention of atrocities. Yes
it is true that a climate of conflict can make you more susceptible commission
atrocities, history shows us that they also get to make in the absence
conflict. We agreed that "the heinous crimes are a process, not an event
I singled out. " This reflection is useful to address more adequately the causes
they could lead to perpetrate international crimes.

As we noted in the report, the extent of prevention necessarily implies
the commitment to work on different fronts, ranging from combating
discrimination and poverty, to strengthen the rule of law and in
particular human rights. Precisely the fifth risk factor identified
by the Secretary-General refers to weak legislative protection in
human rights.

A respect, Mr. President, allow me to share the recent experience of my country
this area. In June 2011, after an extensive consultation process, Mexico approved
a momentous reform of the Constitution which was given constitutional status to
human rights contained in international treaties that my country is a party.

This reform not only reiterated the importance that Mexico attaches to human rights,
but also it involved strengthening the judiciary, responsible for ensuring
broader protection to individuals. Moreover, last week, the Supreme Court
confirmed on human rights the prevalence of international law in
cases in which it grants greater protection than the Constitution itself.

However, for a true rule of law is consolidated, the strengthening
policy must be accompanied by institutional strengthening. Greater openness
democratic leads to greater transparency, greater involvement
civil society in decision-making, and greater accountability.

two

Regarding the participation of civil society, my delegation appreciates the
recognition is made in the report to the recent adoption of the Act
Persons Protection of Human Rights Defenders and Journalists.

We're

convinced that the more extensive the participation of citizens, more
will be the solid social pact that would prevent conflicts and atrocities.

With regard to the critical path that we must follow in the future, my Delegation
It considers that the measures proposed in paragraph 71 of the report, represent a
good basis to build prevention systems.

However, we believe that you must also add the commitment of States
to favor the peaceful resolution of disputes. Acceptance, for example, the
jurisdiction of international tribunals, especially on human rights
and the International Criminal Court, will serve to deter the commission of atrocities.

Mr. president:
While we recognize that the guiding principle of our discussion is the report submitted by the
Secretary General, is inevitable in the current situation, addressing the humanitarian crisis in
the Syrian Arab Republic, where the conflict has caused the deaths of hundreds of thousands of
people, displaced a third of the population and more than two million
refugees, of whom half are children. Syria exemplifies one of the major challenges
prevention under the first pillar of the Responsibility to Protect
identified in the report: the lack of political will.

Unfortunately, the report we are discussing only regrets the failure to prevent
committing atrocities in that country, but it does an analysis of the failures
prevention system. This is a good time to reflect precisely
this in order to prevent recurrence of such shortcomings.

He invites discussion to think, for instance, if the situation we face today, had been
different with the implementation of the seven actions for prevention suggested in the
We note the report of the Secretary-General intends to address the second pillar
Responsibility to Protect in its next report. Since this relates to the
3

responsibility of the international community to use diplomatic means,
humanitarian and other peaceful means appropriate to prevent atrocities and crimes
international, we hope to continue the reflection process in order to identify
a list of lessons that allow us to reinvigorate the responsiveness
and avoid such dramatic crises in the future as it exists today in Syria. Mexico by
Meanwhile he continues to support and work for finding a peaceful solution and
effective to end the conflict in Syria.

Mr. president:
The value of the Responsibility to Protect lies in the enduring appeal to
need to take our protection obligations as entities organized and
governed by international law to aberrant acts such as crimes
War, genocide, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.

At a critical moment as we live, we call honest to do
prevail conscience of humanity and international law, which has as
only objective the welfare of the Syrian people, bearing in mind that the
built responsibility to protect all.

Statement of Mexico
Unofficial Translation from Official Statement
11 September 2013
Mr. President:
My delegation wishes to thank the President of the General Assembly for convening this debate,
and the distinguished panelists who, with their interventions, have set the tone for this
important discussion.

We also thank the Secretary-General for the presentation of his Report, focused on the first
Pillar of the Responsibility to Protect and the responsibility of each State to prevent atrocities
from being committed against their people.

Mr. President:
Undoubtedly, the heart of the Responsibility to Protect is precisely prevention, it is the manner
to prevent people from suffering as a result of atrocities, preventing them before they happen or
preventing any recurrence where they have already. In this regard, the Secretary-General's
Report provides a good starting point to identify the potential risk factors that can cause a
humanitarian crisis. The more we know and understand about the causes that lead to conflict,
the better we can prevent and respond to that potential scenario.

Perhaps the most important material reason for prevention is the degree of application as well
as the controversy that this represents. For that reason it is distinguished in the SecretaryGeneral’s Report, regarding conflict prevention and the prevention of atrocities. While it is true
that a climate of conflict can make it susceptible to commit atrocities, history shows that they
[mass atrocities] are also made in the absence of conflicts. We agree that "the atrocity crimes are
a process, not a single event.” This reflection is useful to address more adequately assess the
causes that could lead to perpetration of international crimes.

As has been expressed in the Report, the breadth and the scope of prevention involves a
commitment on different fronts, including fighting discrimination and poverty, also the
strengthening of the rule of law and in particular, human rights. This is in fact the fifth risk
factor identified by the Secretary-General, it refers to weak legislative protection in the area of
human rights.

In this respect, Mr. President, allow me to share the recent experience of my country in this
area. In June 2011, following an extensive consultation process, Mexico passed a far-reaching
reform to the Constitution which granted constitutional status to human rights [laws] contained
in international treaties to which my country is a party.

This reform not only reiterated the importance of human rights to Mexico, but involved the
strengthening of the judiciary, [which is] responsible for ensuring the broadest protection to the
people. Moreover, last week, the Supreme Court upheld human rights in the prevalence of
international law in cases in which it granted broader protection than the was called for in the
Constitution itself.

Statement of Mexico
Unofficial Translation from Official Statement
11 September 2013
However, in order to consolidate a genuine rule of law, strengthening policy must be
accompanied by institutional fortification. A greater democratic openness leads to greater
transparency, greater civil society participation in decision-making and greater accountability.

Regarding the participation of civil society, my delegation appreciates the recognition given in
the Report to the recent adoption of the Law for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders
Persons and Journalists. We are convinced that the more extensive the participation of citizens,
stronger the social pact that would be to prevent conflicts and atrocities.

Regarding the critical path for us to follow in the future, my delegation believes that the
measures proposed in paragraph 71 of the Report, provide a good basis to build prevention
systems.

However, we believe that we should add also the commitment of states to favor the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Acceptance of, for example, the jurisdiction of international tribunals,
especially in human rights and the International Criminal Court, will serve to deter the
commission of atrocities.

Mr. President:
While we recognize that the guiding principle of our discussion is the Report of the SecretaryGeneral, it is inevitable in the current situation, to address the humanitarian crisis in Arab
Republic of Syria, where the conflict has killed hundreds of thousands of people [and displaced]
one third of the population and more than two million refugees, of whom half are children.

Syria exemplifies one of the main challenges for prevention in the framework of the First Pillar
of the Responsibility to Protect identified in the report: the lack of political will.

Unfortunately, the Report we are discussing only deplores the failure to prevent the commission
of atrocities in [Syria], but it does not offer an analysis of the flaws in the prevention system [in
general]. This is a good time to reflect on precisely this in order to prevent recurrence of such
deficiencies.

The debate invites us to think, for example, if the situation we face today, would have been
different with the implementation of the seven suggested actions to prevent in the Report. We
note the intention of the Secretary-General to address the Second Pillar of the Responsibility to
Protect in the next report.

Since this relates to the international community's responsibility to use appropriate diplomatic,
humanitarian and other peaceful means to prevent atrocities and international crimes, we
expect the process of reflection to continue, allowing us to identify a list of lessons learned to
enable us to reinvigorate responsiveness and avoid dramatic crisis in the future as it is today in
Syria. Mexico in turn will support and work for finding a peaceful and effective solution to end
the conflict in Syria.

Mr. President:

Statement of Mexico
Unofficial Translation from Official Statement
11 September 2013
The value of the Responsibility to Protect resides, doubtlessly, in the constant call for a need to
take on our R2P as organized entities governed by international law to act in the face of
wretched acts of war crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.

This is a crucial moment in which we live in, we make a sincere call for the consciousness of the
humanity and international law to prevail, where the well-being of the Syrian people is the only
objective, always bearing in mind that we are al ‘contributing’ to the Responsibility to Protect