intervention
I KNOW. AMBASSADOR PABLO ANTONIO THALASSINOS,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Panama to the United Nations
"The Republic of Panama and the Responsibility to Protect"
during the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly
of the United Nations
New York, September 11, 2013

Mr. president:
The delegation of Panama joins very warm congratulations that the President has
received from distinguished speakers who have preceded me, and thank likewise the
Secretariat, the report of the Secretary-General before us.

Mr. president:
Sovereignty entails responsibility and permanent obligations to the population.

The sad legacy of the twentieth century, genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, show that it can not be assumed that all
States may or will always want to fulfill the obligations incumbent upon them in relation
with its own population and the damage they may cause to your neighbors. In that circumstance
the principles of collective security mean that the international community must
assume part of that obligation.

It was for that reason that the Heads of State and Government at the World Summit on the
2005, established the concept of responsibility to protect in paragraphs 138 and 139
of the Final Document of the Summit unanimously stating that "each State is
responsibility to protect its population from genocide, war crimes, the
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity ".

They also were in agreement that the international community should through the
Security Council and in accordance with the United Nations Charter, measures
timely and decisive collective, when it was clear that a non
protects its population.

Mr. president:

one

We live in an era in which nations appear to be closer than ever from one
the others and they have enormous potential to improve conditions
life for all; but at the same time, there are many imbalances that give rise to the
concerns of the inhabitants and governments. Persist national situations and
International characterized by the denial of fundamental values ​​regarding
human rights and freedom of peoples.

My Government wishes to express its serious concern about the events taking
place in the Syrian Arab Republic. Something that began as a peaceful protest, has
converted after a two and a half years the scene of heinous crimes
linked to the presence of armed groups and the inability of the government to
protect its population; In addition, the lack of response to the conflict, has
transformed into a moral burden for the prestige of the United Nations and its Member States
Members, in particular, open quotation marks "those who have the primary responsibility
peace and security "as mentioned in the Secretary-General in his
report "The Responsibility to Protect: State responsibility and prevention"
of the July 9, 2013.

The Government of Panama perceives the complex interactions between peace, rights
and human development. When problems and tensions arise in the implementation in my country
development programs, we seek to find solutions to disputes through
mediation and promoting reconciliation. The desire to ensure
effective democratization of national life and to stimulate development, it gives meaning to
the Panamanian government activities performed. Among the measures taken is that of
give the poor and minority groups greater weight in society,
improving education levels and increasing the possibility that the entire population
you can have greater political participation. The rule of law, an independent judiciary
competent and independent human rights, civil society vigorous, one
independent press, and reform of the security sector, to provide stability
the whole population is any identity, contribute to preventing Panama
the internal conflict.

Mr. president:
The Republic of Panama is part of the Friends of the International Coalition
Responsibility to Protect. Our consideration is that we must encourage the
civil society to take action in the promotion and implementation of the Responsibility
Protect national, subregional and regional levels, performing activities
promote the concept.

two

Distinguished colleagues, not lose sight of the ultimate goal of our
Organization since its inception, and all plans of action within it have
agreed, have always brought to the fore to humans, their demands and their
needs and interests.

Finally, Mr President, Panama wishes to reiterate its understanding and solidarity
problems and conflicts suffering brotherly peoples in other regions and we
hope that a speedy solution is found