"So Bicentenanio of the Proclamation of Repiblica 1843-2043
Permanent Mission of the United Nations Preraguas anto
move Sork
INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE
"The responsibility of states to protect their population from THE
Genocide and other crimes "
September 11, 2013, New York
STATEMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PARAGUAY
Mr. Moderator:
It is for the Delegation of the Paraguay a great pleasure to participate in
this initiative truly important. The Government of my country, as a State
respectful of international law, especially human rights, it is
aware of its obligation to promote, respect, protect and fulfill
thereof; therefore it values ​​the important contribution that represents the community
international this debate.

The Republic of Paraguay, has demonstrated its willingness to compromise with
international standards of promotion and protection of human rights;
on this particular subject, it has ratified all international instruments
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General on 9 July,
incorporating them into domestic law and ensuring that
in full compliance with them. With regard to the Statute
Rome of the International Criminal Court, the Government promotes a Draft
legislation implementing the aforementioned instrument, which is in
study at the National Congress for the most serious crimes
against humanity will not go unpunishedThe Paraguayan State is part of the Latin American Network for the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities, which is an important step to
national and regional levels, to promote activities aimed at
eradication of related cases that could result in crimes against
peoples. With support from the coalition seeks to build capacity to prevent
the most heinous crimes, on the basis of education and training in this
one
Check against delivery "ho of the Brcentenanio of the Proclamation of the Reopáblica 1813-2018"
Permanent Mission ded Paraguay anto the Uridas HNaciones
Sort Músva
matter. It also seeks to contribute to regional dialogue on adoption
individual and collective measures to prevent mass atrocities in
region. As part of this network and in collaboration with the Office of the Counsel of the
Secretary General on the Prevention of Genocide United Nations,
Paraguay have made in various activities to disseminate the theme of
preventionThe Government of the Republic of Paraguay considers fundamental and assigns
greater importance to the protection of civilians, without discrimination
any nature, based on national and international standards and
Whereas the main element of its existence. With respect to
future steps, for Paraguay debate still requires greater
analysis and discussion at the intergovernmental level. My delegation, Mr.
Moderator, trust the mechanisms of the United Nations Organization
UN to maintain international security, so we encourage
strengthen the work with existing resources and continue the dialogue with
all parts