Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect at the General Assembly
Wednesday, 11th September 2013
STATEMENT BY DELAGATION OF THE MISSION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION TO THE
UNITED NATIONS
Unofficial transcription of UN webcast
Thank you Mr. Chairman,
We would also like to begin our comments by congratulating the new Special Advisor to the UN on R2P,
Ms. Jennifer Welsh. We hope that we will have effective cooperation with her. I’d like to thank the
Secretary-General for preparing the normal report on R2P to prevent citizens from genocide, from war
crimes, from ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity. This year, there were many important aspects
seen on these crimes. We consider this document as an important part of the Outcome document of 2005,
where we articulated the general concepts and principles that are good to this day on how to protect the
population. In this regard, we support the methods prepared by this report, whereby by emphasizing that
the states are first responsible for this. And the report talks about the responsibility of states to protect
their own populations from genocide, from war crimes, from ethnic cleansing, and crimes against
humanity as a priority. The diversity of risk factors for these crimes in the different states means that it is
very important to ensure R2P. To handle this we need a multifaceted and comprehensive approach.

And now I have some more concrete comments. As we have seen from other reports, we have doubts
about attempts to implement some of the ideas on preventing the war crimes, genocide, crimes against
humanity, and how to we define atrocities, which are not recognized in international law and can be
interpreted in different fashions. With respect to the recommendations in the report, in particular
regarding some states joining the statute of Rome, in our view, it is not shown that it’s a reliable
instrument to deal with violence.

Mr. Chairman,
Life once again brings us back to a conversation on the use of force. Unfortunately this discussion is not
only theoretical in nature. We’re alarmed by what’s going on, attempts to put responsibility for this
presented in a distorted way in Syria regarding the violence going on. Once again we’d like to note that
any violence that’s supposed to be protection risks to lead to the appropriate decisions taken by the
Council and this decision is to be taken in strict compliance with the Charter. As we said, in the World
Outcome Summit document 2005, so we must remember the examples, when we don’t think through
these acts, then we think that we are trying to protect these that have led to chaos as was the situation of
what happened in Libya. In our view, it’s fair to talk about the state of [blank] to take responsibility for
this as Brazil talked about today in their speech. We cannot agree with attempts to base military action
against Syria on narrow concepts of so-called ‘humanitarian intervention,’ which have no basis in
international law, and are not generally recognized and they go against the letter and spirit of the Charter
and we are convinced that the Syrian conflict can be resolved only through discussion and good faith
work to end the suffering of the Syrian people. There is a potential for political settlement and to that we
see the new efforts for example to come to solutions and a way to settle this way that we have undertaken
in our country as well