Unofficial translation
Mr Chairman,
Thank you for holding this debate. The responsibility to protect is a topic that deserves our
full attention. | would like to congratulate Ms Jennifer Welsh on her appointment to the
position of Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect, a key
position for helping the international community to make progress in this area. | would also
like to emphasize the outstanding work of Mr Adama Dieng as Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide. In particular, we applaud the very good report of the
Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect, which contains key reflections on the
prevention of atrocities.

Mr Chairman,
The atrocities currently taking place in Syria are frightening. We must as soon as possible
renew our commitment to prevent such events from happening and long before we reach a
tragic state of affairs like that of SyriaIn this context, let me mention two initiatives aiming at preventing such situations in the
medium term. The group ACT (accountability, coherence, transparency) is designed to re-
mind the Security Council of the particular responsibility conferred on it by the international
community. ACT countries demand that Security Council members refrain from using the
veto when atrocities are committed. Within the United Nations system, we hope the follow-up
process to the Internal Review Panel-Report on UN action in Sri Lanka will result in a more
targeted mobilization of the resources of the UN system in complex situations. These
initiatives are steps in the right direction. But special effort needs to be made at the regional
and national levels, designating focal points for the prevention of atrocities and equipping
ourselves with appropriate planning and budgets. The Secretary-General's report calls on the states who committed to the prevention of
genocide and the responsibility to protect to join their efforts. With the participation of the
Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and the
Responsibility to Protect and important NGOs, Argentina, Australia, Costa-Rica, Denmark,
Switzerland and Tanzania launched a new initiative to this end in 2013. The Global Action
Against Mass Atrocity Crimes (GAAMAC) brings together leading countries involved in the
responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide to strengthen national and regional
structures for the prevention of atrocities, in accordance with the principles of the United Na-
tions. The first international meeting of the GAAMAC will take place in Costa Rica in 2014.

Finally, | would like to stress how important it is to apply the concept of the responsibility to
protect in a coherent and holistic way within the UN system. In most cases, it is not neces-
sary to create new tools — the prevention of atrocities needs to be better integrated into our
day-to-day operations: the rule of law, security sector reform, the fight against impunity, tran-
sitional justice and mediation are all key components of prevention. Also essential in terms
of prevention are the gender dimension of certain atrocities and the necessity to ensure the
full participation of women in decision-making procedures. The Secretary-General's report
clearly identified this, now let us apply it.