Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect at the General Assembly
Wednesday, 11th September 2013
STATEMENT BY H.E. MR. TUVAKO MANONGI, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
MISSION OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
Unofficial transcription of UN webcast
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Mr. Chairman,
The representative of Rwanda, this morning, spoke, quite rightly, that the primary responsibility of any
government is to protect its citizens. The question we must continue to address, in practical terms, is:
“What happens?” Or what right or specifically what responsibilities do other nations have when
government fail to discharge their primary responsibilities. It is without a doubt that responsibility has
consequences, and the truth is, if there are no consequences, then the pleas for the protection and
strengthening of human rights become empty pleas, they become meaningless. That is why the
responsibility to protect has to be translated into concrete action. It is in this regard that we welcome the
SG’s report, and welcome the approaches that are being proposed for consideration in that report. The
Under-Secretary General for Responsibility to Protect reminded us of reasons why these mass atrocities
occur, including situations of armed conflict, and pointed to the need to build preventive capacities. She
reiterated the Secretary-General’s appeal to all of us to do more, including the creation of national
mechanisms. It is in this sense that we have at least seen in Tanzania established our own partnerships for
bolstering national capacities, and our prevention efforts. The office of the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide has been an ardent partner in this regard and we thank you for that. We have also
partnered with governments such as Austria, Argentina, Cambodia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ghana, and
Switzerland, as the result of which indeed early this March we held a workshop in Dar-Es-Salaam on
genocide prevention and the responsibility to protect, which was truly very useful. During that workshop,
the contribution of national and regional civil society organizations, as well as the Global Centre for
Responsibility to Protect were very valuable, which signifies the relationship with civil societies is the
framework to building prevention capacities, and determining risk areas.

But, Mr. Chairman,
In spite of these efforts, the reality is that there continues to be skepticism, not only among governments,
as we have seen in the room: about the nature of this concept and its application. This explains why there
needs to be greater focus on prevention by targeting to the risk factors that are generally local. In our
view, [?] of fragile situations is critical in this regard. At a regional level, we are party to the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes region, we are also within the Protocol on
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and prevention of mass atrocities; we have
participated in the African Peer Review Mechanism, which we found to be a very useful and credible
framework to eliminate some of the risks, as well as of course our membership to the Universal Periodic
Review Mechanisms of the Human Rights Council.

Lastly, Mr. Chairman,

This morning the EU spoke of the need to engender greater cohesion and a more harmonized approach to
preventing conflict and responding to crises, especially those that may lead to atrocities. We could not
agree more. We all have a moral duty, in our own self-interest, but also because it is far less costly to deal
with prevention than the aftermath of atrocities