Mister President,
I would like to thank the Secretary General of the United Nations for his report
focused on the theme of "state responsibility and prevention".

I also congratulate the moderator and the panelists for their
contribution to the development of this interactive dialogue on the theme
abovementioned.

Mister President,
Thirteen years after the World Summit enshrined the concept of
responsibility to protect my country welcomes the efforts made by
the General Assembly, the Security Council and other Member States
UN to advance that concept.

My country believes that the submission of periodic reports and holding
annual informal interactive dialogue on the issue, like this one,
and the recent appointment of the Special Adviser of the Secretary General
the responsibility to protect will help advance the concept.

I also welcome the organization of the meeting of 11 and 12 June in
Accra, Ghana on the global network of national focal points
responsibility to protect. My country took part in this meeting which allowed
to better understand the value of having a national mechanism
protection and prevent future atrocity crimes if they
may exist.

My country is convinced that even in the absence of legal obligations,
there is a moral obligation to provide means for companies to protect
populations against criminal atrocities and thus strengthen the sovereignty
State by increasing the chances for peace and stability. This means that my
1

country fully subscribes to the first two pillars of R2P, which consists of
a reminder of the sovereignty of States to protect their populations without
no outside interference and the obligation of the Community
International to assist the State concerned in this regard, at the request of the State.

My country has the responsibility to protect, above all, as does
take all necessary measures underlying under national laws and
international law to prevent any potential source voltage
crimes atrocities. Suffice to say that Togo endorsed the content of the fifth
Secretary General's report which recommends to examine the underlying causes to allow to take steps to prevent atrocities
where they may exist. Thus, for example in the
framework for elections, which are an increasingly serious threat to the factor
national peace and stability and even international, all efforts are made
to establish visible legal and institutional mechanisms
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. On elections
legislation of 25 July 2013, these mechanisms and institutions took the form
agreements between the Government, political parties and representatives of
civil society, with the participation of several political figures,
religious, labor, and Permanent Framework for Dialogue and Agreement
which allowed the holding of peaceful elections.

Mister President,
I also welcome at the regional level, the national warning system
Early implemented by my country is actively working with the mechanism
regional early warning created within ECOWAS.

2

As a member state of ECOWAS, we made good relationships
neighborliness between states a priority, so that the difficulties faced by a
member state automatically call out to others. Hence the Togo took a
active part not only in the formulation and implementation of
ECOWAS intervention strategies under the responsibility of
protect or as a member of different contact groups, but also
as troops contributing country in crisis in some countries
sub-region as Liberia, Ivory Coast, Guinea-Bissau and Mali, with
the agreement of these countries.

The Togo welcomes the States, which did not had before, are now
establishing national focal points that will better
coordination in the field, even beyond the ECOWAS and the African level.

Statement of Togo
Unofficial Translation from Published Statement
11 September 2013

Mr. President,

I would like to thank the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his report based on
the theme “Responsibility of States and Prevention.”
I would also like to congratulate the moderator and the panelists for their contribution
to the unraveling of the present interactive dialogue on the theme indicated above.

Mr. President,
[Eight] years after World Summit which enshrined the concept of responsibility to
Protect, my country salutes the efforts deployed by the General Assembly, the Security
Council, and other Member-States of the United Nations to advance said concept.

My country feels that the submission of periodic reports and the annual holding of an
informal interactive dialogue on the question, like this one, as well as the recent
nomination of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the responsibility to
Protect, will continue to promote the concept.

I would also like to salute the organization of the gathering, this past 11th and 12th of
June in Accra, Ghana, of the global network of National Focal Points on the
Responsibility to Protect. My country participated in this gathering, which allowed to
better understand the importance of having access to a national protection mechanism
and to prevent possible atrocity crimes in the case that these might exist.

My country is convinced that even in the absence of judicial obligations, there exists a
moral obligation to provide societies with the means of protecting populations against
criminal atrocities, thereby reinforcing the Sovereignty of the State by augmenting the
chances for peace and stability. This shows that my country fully subscribes to the first
two Pillars of R2P, consisting in a reminder of the sovereignty of States to protect their
populations, without any external interference, and of the international community’s
obligation to assist the State in this respect, per said State’s request.

My country understands the Responsibility to Protect primarily as the act of taking all
necessary measures underlying in national laws and international law to prevent any
tension which could potentially be the source of atrocities. We might as well say that
Togo subscribes to the content of the Secretary-General’s fifth report, which advises to
examine the underlying causes to allow for taking measures that should prevent
atrocities in the case that these might exist. That is how, for example, in the case of
elections, which are increasingly a serious threat to national, and sometimes
international, stability all efforts are made to implement visible judicial and institutional

Statement of Togo
Unofficial Translation from Published Statement
11 September 2013

mechanisms for conflict prevention and peace promotion. As for the legislative elections
of 25th July 2013, these mechanisms and institutions have taken the shape of
agreements between the Government, political parties, and the representatives of civil
society, with the participation of several politicians, religious clerics, union
representatives, and a Permanent Framework for Dialogue and Consultation, which
have allowed violence-less elections.

Mr. President,
I am also proud that on the regional level, the early warning mechanism implemented
by my country works actively with the regional early warning mechanisms created
within ECOWAS. As a Member-State of ECOWAS, we have had good neighborly
relations between States, a priority, such that any difficulty a Member-State meets
automatically invokes the others. Thus, Togo has taken an active part not only in the
formulation and implementation of the intervention strategies of ECOWAS within the
framework of R2P, but also as a provider of troops for the crises of some countries in the
sub-region like Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and Mali, with the agreement of
these countries.

Togo is proud that these States, which had not done so before, are in the process of
nominating National Focal Points who will allow for better coordination on the topic,
hopefully beyond ECOWAS and on the African level