2017 United Nations Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to
Protect
Statement by Mr. Rob Scharf
Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation
6 September 2017
New York
[Check against delivery]
Good afternoon. On behalf of the Auschwitz Institute, please first allow me to
express my thanks to the Secretary General for issuing the excellent report
that has inspired this gathering, to the President of the General Assembly for
convening this Interactive Dialogue, and to the Joint Offices of the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect for
all of their continued efforts.
Our organization, the Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation – AIPR
– works with States around the world through education, training, and
technical assistance to support them in developing and strengthening policies
and practices for the prevention of genocide and other mass atrocities.
The Secretary General’s report notes that “the legal obligations of States
extend to addressing root causes of atrocity crimes”. To this end, we engage
directly with States to equip and empower them to fulfil these obligations with
a focus on aiding in the development of durable institutions that respond to
risk factors and stop potential atrocity crimes before they develop. This also
ensures that those responsible for preventing atrocity crimes at the national
level are trained and prepared to do so.
National Mechanisms are important element of State-level prevention. Our
Booklet on National Mechanisms for the Prevention of Genocide and other
Atrocity Crimes, which is published annually and made available to the public,
contains examples of States working to fulfil their protective and preventive
obligations through new or existing inter-ministerial bodies. We would like to
commend these States for serving as leaders and examples for the
international community.

In addition to working directly with States to fulfil their Responsibility to
Protect, our work also supports and engages with regional bodies dedicated to
the prevention of atrocity crimes. In this context, I would like to draw
particular attention to two of the regional bodies mentioned in the Secretary
General’s report, which often serve as models for the international
community. The first is the Latin American Network for Genocide and Mass
Atrocity Prevention – to which the Auschwitz Institute has the honor of
serving as Technical Secretariat – with the second being the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Networks and arrangements like these bring together legislators and
decision-makers from different States within a given region on a regular basis
in order to discuss planned and ongoing work related to prevention. These
frameworks provide a forum that allows for an ongoing exchange of proven
policies and best practices, as well as allowing participants to benefit from the
exchange of lessons learned – between colleagues from neighboring countries
– as they work to reinforce national and regional mechanisms that prevent
and halt atrocities. Arrangements such as these build on national-level
initiatives and encourage the creation of context-specific approaches and
strategies, as well as systems for prevention. They not only promote the
prioritization of preventive policies within the agendas of participating
member-states, but also support the development and implementation of
standardized training programs for public officials. Furthermore, bringing
officials together on this basis helps to reinforce a shared sense of community
and, with it, confers an additional layer of accountability between peers.
Thank you very much for this morning session. It is our hope that the
Interactive Dialogue, together with the Secretary General’s report, will serve
to inspire important progress in ensuring that accountability is maintained
relative to the prevention of atrocity crimes to the benefit of vulnerable
populations around the world.

