Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the SecretaryGeneral
9 March 2017
Mr. President,
I have the honor to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.
As the High Commissioner’s Annual Report notes, 2016 saw many “significant and protracted
crises [and] civilian casualties in conflicts reach alarming levels, while deaths and suffering
from large-scale movements of people continued to rise”.
We believe that this Council can and should exert greater effort to protect populations from
mass atrocities by responding to early warning signs when they arise and preventing situations
from escalating. To do this, we welcome the vital work of the High Commissioner and his staff
and recognize their efforts in addressing violations and abuses of human rights before they
reach the level of a mass atrocity.
We also strongly welcome the new Secretary-General’s focus on creating a “culture of
prevention” and to his commitment to Human Rights Up Front. In the Secretary-General’s
words, at the current time, the international community spends “far more time and resources
responding to crises rather than preventing them”.
Mr. President,
Preventing genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing is the raison
d’etre of the Responsibility to Protect. Widespread violations and abuses of human rights can
lead to the commission of mass atrocities. By protecting populations from violations and abuses
of human rights, we lay the ground for their prevention on a larger scale. RtoP is focused on
prevention and provides member states and the international community with a toolkit of
preventive and protective measures.
In this regard, the OHCHR, UN treaty bodies and special procedures can be exceptionally wellsuited to help us identify mass atrocity risks. We encourage all of them to speak out responsibly
and credibly to allow this Council to take timely action. We call on States to cooperate fully
with Human Rights Council mechanisms established in view of preventing mass atrocities, and
contributing to accountability for serious human rights violations and abuses.
The High Commissioner and his Office first and foremost play a key role in alerting the world
to imminent dangers. We welcome the High Commissioner’s strong voice in this area and
encourage him to continue to draw attention to widespread violations and abuses of human
rights that could lead to the risk of mass atrocities when needed.
A useful tool for all Human Rights Council mechanisms is the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes, produced by the Office of the UN Special Advisers on Genocide Prevention

and RtoP. The Framework can help in monitoring and early warning of the risk factors, and
strengthen our prevention and protection. We encourage all Human Rights Council
mechanisms and governments to make use of the Framework.
Mr. President,
The information gathered on specific risks can help contribute to the prevention of mass
atrocities. In this regard, we also encourage the Office of the High Commissioner and Special
Procedures to continue to provide regular information in their annual reports presented to the
Human Rights Council and to the United Nations General Assembly to encourage better and
more timely preventive action, and continue to provide briefings within their mandate to the
United Nations Security Council. We have a common responsibility to protect – we must and
we can do better.
Thank you.

