Statement South Sudan Special Session on behalf of the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect
14 December 2016
Mr. President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect (Rwanda and The Netherlands).
We are deeply concerned about the situation in South Sudan and the heightened risk of mass atrocity crimes.
Since late October, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the UN Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide, and the UN Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan have all voiced their concern
regarding the rising incidents of hate speech, including by government officials, and the systematic targeting,
killings and forced displacement of the civilian population, including sexual violence against women and
girls.
As the UN Special Representative for the Prevention of Genocide said, many of the warning signals of
impending genocide are already there – an existing conflict, resort to polarized ethnic identities,
dehumanization, a culture of denial, displacement based on ethnicity and in some places indications of
systematic violations and planning. With the stalling of the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
current humanitarian crisis, a stagnating economy and the proliferation of arms, all of the ingredients exist
for a dangerous escalation of violence, warning in his own words that, “what began as a political conflict has
transformed into what could become an outright ethnic war.”
As the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan and the Special Adviser have stated, there is still time
to prevent escalation of violence towards genocide in South Sudan. In that regard, the Human Rights Council
and its mechanisms have a critical preventative role to play and we welcome the convening of this special
session.
The Transitional Government of National Unity bears the primary responsibility to protect its population
from mass atrocities. In this regard we welcome the cooperation of the Government with the Human Rights
Commission and other United Nations mechanisms and its consent to the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force.
We call on the Human Rights Council:
•
•
•
•
•

To strongly condemn ethnically-fueled violence and hate speech and to continue to insist on
preventing further incitement to discrimination, hostility, and hatred that could lead to more
violence.
To strongly condemn the unprecedented levels of sexual violence in South Sudan and ensure prompt
investigation and accountability for all those responsible.
To call on the political leadership of South Sudan to immediately condemn and take steps to prevent
any act of discrimination, hostility, and hatred that could constitute incitement to violence.
To stress the importance of an inclusive political process, the urgent need to engage in both
community and national level dialogue and the establishment of the Commission for Truth, Healing
and Reconciliation by the Government foreseen in the peace agreement.
To call for the immediate establishment of the hybrid court as set out in the peace agreement to
ensure justice and accountability.

While stressing that the Government of South Sudan has the primary responsibility to protect its population,
other States, regional organisations and the international community can assist its protection efforts. In that
regard, there is an urgent need for strengthened cooperation with the African Union, IGAD and UNMISS in
order to move this process forward.
Finally we call on the Government of South Sudan to continue and fully cooperate with these processes, grant
unfettered humanitarian access and to facilitate the deployment of the Regional Protection Force.

Thank you.

