 CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect

Trusteeship Council, 10am, 6 September 2016

Opening remarks by H.E. Mr Mogens Lykketoft,

President of the 70" session of the General Assembly

Excellencies, Mr. Deputy Secretary-General, distinguished participants, ladies

and gentlemen,

Good morning.

It is a great pleasure to welcome you to this year’s informal interactive

dialogue on the responsibility to protect.

At the 2005 World Summit, all Heads of State and Government affirmed the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic

cleansing and crimes against humanity.

They also stressed the need for the General Assembly to continue

consideration of the responsibility to protect. CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

The General Assembly has fulfilled this role by organizing annual informal
interactive dialogues. Each of these dialogues has been informed by a report

of the Secretary-General.

In his first report, in 2009, the Secretary-General proposed a strategy for the
implementation of the responsibility to protect based on three equal, non-
sequential, and mutually reinforcing pillars. Pillar | focuses on the protection
responsibilities of the State; Pillar II on international assistance and capacity-

building; and Pillar III on timely and decisive response.

A number of the subsequent reports and informal interactive dialogues

focused on developing elements of this strategy for implementation.

Last year, the General Assembly’s informal interactive dialogue on the
responsibility to protect focused on an assessment of progress in the first
decade of the principle. On the basis of the insights provided by the
Secretary-General’s report, States reflected on conceptual and political
progress and highlighted positive lessons learnt in the implementation of the
principle. The dialogue also provided an opportunity for discussion on aspects

of implementation where the record is mixed. CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

We know that there is a growing consensus on the key elements of the
responsibility to protect, including that its scope is limited to the protection of
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity; that the primary responsibility to protect populations lies with
national authorities, that prevention must remain a priority for all States and
the international community, and that implementation must take place in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and other established
principles of international law. We also know that there are areas on which
there is a need for further discussion, including the relationship among the
three pillars and the basis for undertaking collective action in those situations

when States are manifestly failing to protect their populations.

 

This year’s dialogue is informed by a report of the Secretary-General that
invites us to focus on the obstacles to mobilizing collective action to prevent
and respond to genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against

humanity, and suggests how such barriers might be overcome. 4
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

The report starts with the candid assessment that, in spite of the growing
consensus that exists on the principle, the international community has fallen
short of its aspiration to prevent and respond to the crimes and violations
associated to the responsibility to protect. The report encourages discussion
on aspects where further debate is required, while taking a practical look at
ways to overcome the obstacles that continue limiting our collective capacity
to prevent and to respond to these crimes. The task of strengthening
preventive strategies, providing timely and decisive response, preventing
recurrence and renewing the institutional Capacity to prevent and respond, is
of the highest ambition. The plight of suffering populations and vulnerable

communities requires no less.

| am delighted that our panel today includes the two former Special Advisers
on the Responsibility to Protect, Edward Luck and Jennifer Welsh. | look
forward to hearing their views as to the challenges and opportunities they
encountered in their efforts to advance the principle over the years in which

they served. 5
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

| invite all Member States to participate constructively by reflecting on the

issues raised in this year’s Secretary-General’s report.

| trust that our discussions today will contribute to strengthen our capacity to

mobilize collective action and to advance the General Assembly's

consideration of this principle.

| wish you every success in your deliberations.