 Permanent Mission of the United Republic of Tanzania

STATEMENT BY

MR. TUVAKO N. MANONGI,
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS

AT AN INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE
OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ON RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

TUESDAY 06 SEPTEMBER, 2016

307 East 53rd Street, 5TH Floor, New York NY 10022
Tel. No. 212-697-3612 | Fax. No. 212-697-3618 Mr. President,

The significance of collective action and improved capacity to coordinate
early responses against genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity is, in our view, beyond question.

As a principle, Responsibility to Protect (R2P), is now enjoying a large
measure of political consensus. A consensus rooted on the admission that the
concept of State sovereignty also implies a responsibility to protect ones citizenry.
Failure to live up to this responsibility triggers a common or collective
responsibility shared by other States and other actors to intervene and protect.

This growing consensus influenced the African Union’s shift from the
principle of non-interference to non-indifference as currently reflected in Article
4(h) of the Constitutive Act. The provision grants the Union the right to intervene in
a Member State in respect of grave circumstances, namely; “war crimes, genocide,
and crimes against humanity.”

However, even when our vision and ideals are noble and outstanding,
translating them into concrete action remains a challenge we must overcome. As we
know all too well, these barriers or constraints are not only limited to Africa. They
are universal. Which is why this dialogue is an important engagement to hold.

Responsibility to Protect (R2P) will not be effective when solely left to a State
alone. Many States need to be capacitated in integrating the core values of R2P in
the integrity and character of a multiplicity of actors, at the local and state levels. In
addition, it must also be a responsibility among states at a regional and
international levels working with regional and international organizations.

R2P will also not be effective if the question of the Security Council’s veto is
not resolved. The hope that the application of the veto will always transcend
political differences amongst the five Permanent Members in cases of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is nothing but an illusion.
There must be a responsibility not to veto. Not to veto a resolution against genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity.

Finally, this Dialogue is seeking the right answers on how best we can
proceed to fill the gap between our commitments and our record of action.
Individual state actions alone will not be sufficient. We must strengthen the
collective responsibility of a host of actors - at the local, national, regional,
international and, yes, at the United Nations.

I thank you.