 SLOVAKIA

General Assembly informal interactive dialogue on the Report of the Secretary-General
on the Responsibility to Protect Mobilizing Collective Action: The Next Decade of the
Responsibility to Protect (United Nations, 6 September 2016 - New York)

Mr. President,

Thank you for convening this interactive dialogue following the release of the Secretary-
General’s report entitled Mobilizing Collective Action: The Next Decade of the
Responsibility to Protect.

While aligning ourselves with the statement delivered earlier by the European Union, there
are a few remarks we would like to make from a national point of view.

We stress the need for the General Assembly to continue the consideration of the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity in line with the principles of the UN Charter and international law with
a view to accelerate efforts for effective implementation of the principle.

Prevention is the foundation of the Responsibility to Protect. Thus higher priority must be
given to early warning and prevention and other forms of peaceful settlement to address
threats to international peace and security and promote peace and reconciliation. The
prevention must be central across the 3 pillars of the UN work. The conflict-sensitivity must
be increased across the whole UN system.

Peacekeeping operations with protection mandates are crucial when the host Government fails
to live up to its responsibility to protect. With the increase of civilian deaths and the changing
nature of conflict, we have to make peacekeeping operations more capable of protecting
civilians and UN personnel in high-risk environments.

We have to strengthen our support for international criminal justice. The permanent
International Criminal Court (ICC), based on the Rome Statute provides an important
institutional deterrent by holding those individuals accountable who are ,,most responsible“
for mass atrocities.

Humanitarian needs are at their highest level since WWII and more than 60 million people
have been displaced by conflict. Governments have to strengthen their commitment to
obligations existing under international humanitarian law, intemational human rights law,
refugee law and international criminal law.

Strengthening good governance and the rule of law. The Agenda 2030 for the first time
integrated the issues of good governance, access to justice and public safety into the
development agenda. Goal 16 of the SDGs gives an important emphasis on peace as part of the approach to sustainability. Here, I wish to underline the importance of developing
democratic, inclusive and accountable security institutions for the protection of civilians and
the sustainability of the peace.

FINALLY,

We too are supportive of the proposals by France and Mexico and The “ACT” code of
conduct aimed at helping to stop genocide, crimes against humanity, or war crimes. I should
also like to express our support for the work of the UN Office on Genocide Prevention and the
Responsibility to Protect.