Statement	  delivered	  by	  Peru	  –	  Informal	  Interactive	  Dialogue	  on	  R2P,	  6	  September	  2016	  
[TRANSLATION]	  

	  
Mr.	  Chair,	  	  
	  
1. My	   delegation	   expresses	   its	   special	   appreciation	   for	   the	   eight	   and	   last	   report	   (of	   the	   current	  
Secretary-­‐General)	   on	   the	   Responsibility	   to	   Protect.	   This	   report,	   titled	   “Mobilizing	   collective	  
action:	   the	   next	   decade	   of	   the	   responsibility	   to	   protect”,	   assesses	   the	   trends	   regarding	   the	  
commission	   of	   atrocity	   crimes	   (genocide,	   war	   crimes,	   ethnic	   cleansing	   and	   crimes	   against	  
humanity)	  during	  the	  last	  10	  years,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  obstacles	  to	  the	  effective	  application	  of	  R2P,	  
and	  attempts	  to	  draft	  the	  concepts	  and	  to	  prepare	  the	  agenda	  for	  the	  next	  Secretary-­‐General.	  
2. In	   this	   regard,	   we	   call	   for	   this	   dialogue	   to	   be	   a	   genuine	   reflection	   and	   self-­‐criticism	   on	   the	  
sources	   of	   the	   current	   conflicts	   which	   cause	   devastation	   in	   almost	   every	   regions	   of	   the	   world,	  
while	  bearing	  in	  mind	  in	  mind	  that	  R2P	  has	  not	  been	  conceived	  to	  undermine,	  but	  to	  strengthen	  
the	  sovereignty	  of	  States	  as	  a	  principle	  enshrined	  in	  the	  UN	  Charter.	   Indeed,	  we	  must	  not	  forget	  
that	  R2P	  is	  primarily	  the	  responsibility	  of	  the	  State.	  	  
3. This	   being	   said,	   Peru	   reaffirms	   its	   commitment	   to	   consolidating	   the	   principle	   of	   R2P,	   as	   it	   was	  
articulated	  in	  paragraphs	  138-­‐139	  of	  the	  Final	  Document	  of	  the	  [World]	  Summit	  (A/RES/60/1),	  
and	  its	  implementation	  through	  its	  three	  pillars1.	  With	  respect	  to	  the	  third	  pillar	  (and	  its	  relation	  
to	   the	   other	   pillars),	   my	   delegation	   shares	   the	   position	   of	   the	   Secretary-­‐General	   in	   the	   sense	  
that	   the	   international	   community	   should	   always	   act	   through	   peaceful	   means,	   in	   collaboration	  
with	  national	  authorities,	  and	  that	  military	  force	  should	  always	  be	  a	  means	  of	  last	  resort.	  
	  
Mr.	  Chair,	  	  
	  
4. Peru	   attaches	   the	   greatest	   importance	   to	   the	   preventive	   aspect	   of	   the	   R2P	   principle,	   which	   is	  
essential	   for	   Latin	   America.	   We	   would	   like	   to	   stress	   the	   educational	   dimension	   of	   conflict	  
prevention.	  In	  this	  regard,	  we	  wish	  to	  highlight	  that	  Peru	  relies	  on	  a	  National	  Educational	  Plan	  in	  
Fundamental	   Rights	   and	   Obligations	   for	   2021,	   which	   establishes	   a	   comprehensive	   strategy	   to	  
promote	   a	   human	   rights	   culture	   in	   the	   country,	   as	   well	   as	   a	   national	   mechanism	   of	   conflict	  
prevention	   and	   management	   in	   the	   “Denfensoría	   del	   Pueblo”.	   We	   also	   wish	   to	   highlight	  
international	   cooperation	   in	   creating	   systems	   of	   prevention	   in	   this	   matter,	   through	   UNESCO	  
programs	  for	  instance.	  All	  of	  this	  seeks	  to	  ensure	  the	  education	  of	  youth	  and	  a	  culture	  of	  peace	  
removed	  from	  the	  influence	  of	  groups	  which	  incite	  violent	  extremism.	  
	  
Mr.	  Chair,	  	  
	  
5. As	   a	   State	   with	   a	   long	   tradition	   of	   unconditional	   respect	   for	   international	   law,	   my	   delegation	  
notes	  with	  concern	  one	  of	  the	  trends	  identified	  by	  the	  Secretary-­‐General	  in	  his	  Report,	  namely	  
the	   increase	   in	   gross	   violations	   of	   international	   humanitarian	   law	   (deliberate	   attacks	   on	   civilians	  
and	  others),	  which	  highlights	  the	  wide	  gap	  between	   the	  commitments	  made	  by	  Member	  States	  
and	  the	  reality	  faced	  by	  the	  most	  vulnerable	  civilians	  around	  the	  world.	  Another	  indicator	  of	  the	  
same	   problem	   is	   the	   number	   of	   States	   that	   still	   have	   not	   ratified	   fundamental	   international	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

	  The	  commitment	  of	  Peru	  to	  the	  development	  and	  the	  consolidation	  of	  the	  R2P	  principle	  is	  also	  demonstrated	  in	  
the	  great	  attention	  that	  the	  Government	  of	  Peru	  pays	  to	  the	  information	  requested	  for	  the	  work	  of	  the	  Secretariat	  
(e.g.	  presentation	  of	  the	  inputs	  for	  the	  Compendium	  of	  Practice,	  in	  November	  2015;	  presentation	  on	  inputs	  for	  the	  
eight	  Report	  of	  the	  SG,	  in	  April	  2016,	  among	  others).	  

instruments	  related	  to	  the	  protection	  of	  civilians,	  or	  that	  have	  done	  so,	  but	  do	  not	   enforce	  its	  
dispositions.	  	  	  
6. In	  that	  context,	  my	  delegation	  believes	  it	  is	  important	  that	  we	  consider	  elaborating	  projects	  of	  
medium-­‐term	   and	   long-­‐term	   plans	   of	   action	   addressing	   concrete	   measures	   dedicated	   to	  
strengthen	  the	  level	  of	  commitment	  and	  awareness	  to,	  and	  implementation	  of,	  R2P.	  Those	  plans	  
of	   action	   could	   consist	   in	   a	   primary	   phase	   where	   universalisation	   fundamental	   normative	  
instruments	   relevant	   to	   R2P	   are	   promoted	   (i.e.:	   the	   1948	   Convention	   for	   the	   Prevention	   and	  
Punishment	  of	  the	  Crime	  of	  Genocide	  and	  the	  Rome	  Stature	  of	  the	  International	  Criminal	  Court).	  
A	  second	  phase	  could	  involve	  the	  design	  of	  systems	  or	  mechanisms	  of	  early	  warning	  of	  universal	  
and	  regional	  character,	  that	  make	  it	  possible	  to	  identify	  situations	  of	  potential	   conflicts	  where	  
mass	  atrocities	  could	  be	  committed.	  In	  this	  regard,	  it	  would	  be	  useful	  to	  strengthen	  the	  areas	  of	  
cooperation	   and	   of	   exchanges	   of	   experiences,	   so	   as	   to	   include	   activities	   that	   aim	   to	   train	   and	  
increase	  the	  awareness	  of	  public	  officials	  that	  have	  the	  authority	  to	  make	  decisions,	  as	  well	  as	  
parliamentarians	   who	   are	   in	   charge	   of	   legislation	   and	   ratification	   of	   treaties	   that	   are	   essential	  
for	   the	   protection	   of	   human	   rights.	   Finally,	   a	   third	   phase	   would	   be	   dedicated	   to	   drafting	  
collective	  action	  protocols	  to	  face	  various	  potential	  scenarios,	  providing	  us	  with	  examples	  of	  the	  
type	   of	   action	   that	   is	   necessary	   when	   confronted	   with	   different	   cases,	   and	   taking	   into	   account	   –	  
as	  previously	  mentioned	  –	  that	  military	  intervention	  is	  a	  measure	  of	  last	  resort.	  
7. Concerning	  the	  obstacles	  that	  prevent	  collective	  action	  in	  the	  face	  of	  the	  risks	  of	  mass	  atrocities,	  
Peru	  agrees	  with	  the	  Report	  of	  the	  Secretary-­‐General	  regarding	  the	  necessity	  of	  restraining	  the	  
right	  to	  veto.	  In	  this	  respect,	  we	  reiterate	  to	  reform	  the	  work	  methods	  of	  the	  Security	  Council;	  
this	   is	   why	   Peru	   supports	   the	   France/Mexico	   Initiative,	   as	   well	   as	   the	   initiative	   of	   the	   ACT	   group,	  
led	  by	  Liechtenstein,	  on	  a	  Code	  of	  Conduct	  for	  the	  use	  veto	  in	  the	  Council.	  Both	  initiatives,	  which	  
complement	   one	   another,	   require	   that	   the	   highest	   political	   body	   of	   the	   UN	   exercise	   greater	  
responsibility,	   coherence	   and	   transparency	   in	   its	   action,	   particularly	   in	   situations	   that	   could	  
require	  the	  invocation	  of	  the	  R2P	  principle.	  	  
	  
Mr.	  Chair,	  	  
	  
8. I	  would	  like	  to	  reaffirm	  our	  support	  to	  the	  principle	  of	  R2P	  and	  its	  strengthening,	  and	  we	  thank	  
the	  Secretary-­‐General	  and	  the	  Secretariat	  in	  general	  for	  their	  relentless	  work,	  whose	  very	  useful	  
periodic	  reports	  assist	  Members	  States	  in	  designing	  concrete	  policies	  specific	  to	  R2P.	  Thanks	  to	  
their	  efforts,	  we	  are	  convinced	  that	  we	  will	  succeed	  in	  increasing	  our	  capacity	  to	  prevent	  mass	  
atrocities.	  	  
	  
Thank	  you.	  

