Statement	  delivered	  by	  Mexico	  –	  Informal	  Interactive	  Dialogue	  on	  R2P,	  6	  September	  2016	  
[TRANSLATION]	  

	  
Thank	  you,	  Mr.	  Chair.	  
	  
Mexico	   thanks	   you	   for	   having	   convene	   this	   interactive	   dialogue	   and	   welcomes	   the	   report	   of	   the	  
Secretary-­‐General,	   “Mobilizing	   collective	   action:	   the	   next	   decade	   of	   the	   responsibility	   to	   protect”.	   We	  
also	   acknowledge	   the	   constant	   efforts	   of	   the	   Secretary-­‐General	   to	   build	   consensus	   around	   the	   R2P	  
principle.	  	  
	  
For	   over	   a	   decade,	   the	   international	   community	   has	   manifested	   its	   refusal	   of	   genocide,	   war	   crimes,	  
ethnic	   cleansing	   and	   crimes	   against	   humanity.	   Over	   the	   last	   71	   years,	   the	   Organization	   has	   learned,	  
sometimes	  through	  failure,	  about	  the	  causes	  and	  consequences	  of	  those	  atrocities	  which	  unfortunately	  
persist	  as	  threats	  to	  international	  peace	  and	  security.	  	  
	  
One	  year	  ago,	  Mexico	  spoke	  out	  for	  a	  plan	  of	  action	  of	  entire	  UN	  system	  to	  implement	  the	  three	  pillars	  
of	  R2P.	  We	  continue	  to	  believe	  that	  a	  resolution	  from	  the	  general	  Assembly	  could	  enable	  the	  Member	  
States	   to	   express	   their	   views	   on	   this	   matter.	   We	   agree	   with	   the	   Secretary-­‐General:	   it	   is	   necessary	   to	  
move	  from	  concept	  to	  action.	  	  
	  
Today,	  we	  welcome	  the	  “Human	  Rights	  Up	  Front”	  initiative	  as	  a	  support	  for	  implementing	  early	  warning.	  
The	  R2P	  represents,	  first	  and	  foremost	  and	  for	  all,	  a	  responsibility	  to	  prevent.	  
	  
Mexico	  believes	  that	  the	  UN	  still	  has	  much	  work	  to	  do	  in	  order	  to	  operationalize	  R2P.	  The	  Framework	  of	  
Analysis	  for	  Atrocity	  Crimes	  is	  extremely	  useful	  in	  this	  sense.	  	  
	  
We	   note	   with	   concern	   the	   protracted	   nature	   of	   various	   armed	   conflicts.	   We	   strongly	   condemn	   the	  
recent	  alleged	  use	  of	  chemical	  weapons	  in	  some	  parts	  of	  these	  conflicts.	  	  
	  
Those	  crimes	  persist	   in	  the	  face	  of	  the	  political	  indifference	  of	  third	  parties.	  The	  paralysis	  of	  the	  Security	  
Council	  to	  respond	  to	  protracted	  crisis	  is	  simply	  and	  plainly	  unacceptable.	  Suspending	  the	  veto	  in	  those	  
cases	  has	  become	  a	  moral	  imperative	  and	  a	  principle	  of	  accountability	  of	  the	  five	  permanent	  members	  
of	  the	  Council.	  
	  
We	   can	   provide	   a	   considerable	   impetus	   in	   the	   regard.	   Mexico	   urges	   all	   Member	   States	   to	   join	   the	  
France/Mexico	  Initiative	  on	  veto	  restraint	  in	  the	  Security	  Council	  and	  the	  ACT	  Code	  of	  Conduct.	  The	  veto	  
is	  not	  a	  privilege;	  it	  is	  a	  responsibility.	  	  
	  
Mr.	  Chair,	  	  
	  
Mexico	   has	   taken	   an	   active	   part	   in	   the	   Latin	   American	   Network	   for	   Genocide	   and	   Mass	   Atrocity	  
Prevention.	   We	   have	   trained	   officials	   through	   the	   Intersectorial	   Commission	   on	   Human	   Rights	   and	  
International	   Humanitarian	   Law,	   which	   represents	   strengthening	   capacities,	   access	   to	   technical	  
assistance	  and	  a	  better	  discussion	  on	  monitoring	  and	  early	  warning.	  	  
	  
International	   law	   is	   the	   very	   source	   of	   our	   collective	   responsibility.	   Mexico	   invites	   countries	   that	   have	  
not	   done	   so	   to	   ratify	   the	   international	   instruments	   relevant	   to	   R2P,	   especially	   the	   Convention	   on	  
Genocide	  and	  the	  Rome	  Statute	  of	  the	  International	  Criminal	  Court.	  

	  
Mr.	  Chair,	  	  
	  
Mexico	  firmly	  believes	  that	  the	  prevention	  of	  genocide,	  war	  crimes,	  ethnic	  cleansing	  and	  crimes	  against	  
humanity	  is	  at	  the	  heart	  of	  this	  Organization’s	  raison	  d’être.	  We	  hope	  that	  the	  next	  Secretary-­‐General	  
will	  bring	  a	  new	  impulse	  to	  the	  concept	  and	  that	  he	  or	  she	  will	  work	  with	  all	  Member	  States	  and	  civil	  
society	  to	  ensure	  that	  we	  can	  fulfil	  the	  indefectible	  commitment	  to	  innocent	  people	  before	  they	  become	  
victims.	  	  
	  
Thank	  you	  very	  much.	  

