Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the
Secretary-General
11 September 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect.
Together we would like to express our deep gratitude and admiration for the outgoing High
Commissioner, who fought tirelessly to promote and protect human rights, gave a voice to
millions of victims of large-scale human rights violations and abuses, and played a
fundamental role in stressing states’ individual and shared responsibility to protect
populations from mass atrocity crimes.
We call upon the new High Commissioner, in accordance with her mandate, to continue
highlighting gross human rights violations and abuses, which often times serve as early
warning signs of situations that may escalate into mass atrocity crimes.
Mr President,
Thirteen years ago the international community unanimously endorsed the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing. Geneva-based human rights mechanisms often lay the ground for the prevention
of mass atrocity crimes by speaking out and acting upon widespread violations and abuses of
human rights. We therefore wish to highlight the importance of a more systematic
integration of human rights into conflict and atrocity prevention agendas.
In this regard, the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council are exceptionally well
suited to highlight early warning signs and provide information on potential and current
mass atrocity situations. In particular, their advocacy and awareness-raising activities for
both thematic and country-specific issues allow for the effective and timely responses to
large-scale human rights violations. We encourage the Special Procedures mechanisms to
highlight mass atrocity risks in their annual reports presented to the Human Rights Council,
and further emphasize the importance of regular briefings, within their mandate, to the UN
Security Council.
In addition, the Human Rights Council and its procedures plays a crucial role in
strengthening states’ individual efforts to prevent mass atrocity crimes. By providing
technical assistance and capacity building measures, states are able to strengthen respect for
the rule of law and good governance and consolidate effective and accountable national
institutions, which are key elements for effective atrocity prevention.
We further welcome the work of the Human Rights Council’s ongoing investigation
mechanisms as well as other Mechanisms. Such investigative mechanisms allow the Human
Rights Council to respond to situations of serious violations of international law, promoting
accountability and fighting impunity. Ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes also
plays a fundamental role in preventing their recurrence.
Mr President,
Ongoing conflict and atrocities around the world demonstrate the need for greater attention
on the linkages between the prevention of mass atrocity crimes, which often times arise from
long standing and widespread violations of human rights, and the maintenance of

international peace and security. Human rights violations and mass atrocity crimes are both
also often times a result of failures of maintaining the rule of law and development, including
discrimination, lack of good governance and radicalisation.
In this respect, we wish to express our strong commitment to the Secretary General’s Human
Rights Up Front among other efforts to strengthen ties between peace and security,
development and human rights. Emphasizing the need for greater cooperation between
various UN agencies and organs will allow for a more holistic, effective and timely response
to persistent and widespread human rights violations and situations at risk of mass atrocity
crimes.
Mr President,
The current displacement of over 65 million people due to conflict, violence and atrocities
demonstrates the need for a strong and consolidated commitment of the international
community to adhere to the international rule of law. As such, we are ready and committed to
assist member states in upholding their primary responsibility to protect populations from
mass atrocity crimes. We must also ensure that those responsible for mass atrocity crimes are
brought to justice.
Thank you.

