Statement delivered by Iran – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016 [UNOFFICIAL
TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]

Thank you, Mr. Moderator.
I would like to appreciate the Secretary General’s report on the Responsibility to Protect. I extend my
appreciation to the President of the General Assembly for organizing this interactive dialogue. The sad
experiences of the last decades in the Middle East and North Africa, which have highly contributed to the
regeneration and extension of terrorism and extremism in affected countries, and the world as a whole,
exposed the consequences of irresponsible protection.
We note the report of the Secretary General and its recommendations. We agree that the concentration
of the international community should focus on the prevention of mass atrocities, and we support the
strengthening of UN early warning system.
We also maintain that the use of military means to protect populations from atrocity crimes shall be
governed by Security Council decisions. However, authorization of Security Council shall not be
understood as carte blanche. The Security Council should monitor the operations on the ground. It is also
the responsibility of the international community to assist the construction process in post-intervention
era.
Mr. Moderator, it remains a matter of absolute concern that the use of R2P may bring more harm than
good. Meanwhile, in the absence of genuine and unbiased functioning structure, there is persistent
tendency to apply double standards and selective approaches, which grant impunity to favorable ones,
and overlooks atrocities committed by them, no matter how serious and how horrific they are. Selectivity,
double standards and politicization of the concept make it prone to manipulation and abuse, undermine
the integrity of this concept, and gives the impression that the main objective behind R2P is political
agenda or interests rather than saving the lives of people. The objective of R2P shall not be regime change,
but protection of population. This is the major obstacle which preclude R2P to become effective. Member
states should address this deficiency in a serious and objective manner.
Thank you Mr. Moderator.

