2nd

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Intersessional seminar on the contribution of the Human Rights
Council to the prevention of human rights violations

8 October 2019
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect. We would like to thank the Chairrapporteur and all the panellists for their remarks.
The Group of Friends of R2P has continuously emphasized that widespread
and systematic violations of human rights can serve as early warning signs of
potential genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and/or crimes against
humanity. The prevention of such violations, including through
accountability, is crucial to ensure prevention of their potential escalation into
atrocity crimes.
In this regard, we welcome today’s discussion on the cooperation between the
Human Rights Council and the pillars of the United Nations system on the
prevention of human rights violations with the view to sustaining peace and
implementing sustainable development.
The relationship between human rights and development, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, is mutually reinforcing and
complementary. Without addressing human rights violations and abuses
persistent in many places around the world, progress in sustainable
development will be impeded. It is therefore crucial to recognize that the
pursuit of good governance, legitimate and accountable domestic institutions
and the rule of law are not only key for sustainable development, but further
constitute pre-requisites for societies which are resilient to discrimination,
radicalisation and other warning signs which, if not addressed, could lead to
atrocities.
We therefore call upon the HRC, within its mandate, to deepen its engagement
with development stakeholders, including international and regional
mechanisms, national institutions and civil society, to better embed and
integrate its work, in particular those focusing on technical assistance and
capacity building, in frameworks focusing on the implementation of the SDGs.
In this regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s prioritisation of a
systematic integration of human rights into the work of Resident Coordinators
and UN country teams.
We further recognize the linkages between the peace and security agenda and
the work of the HRC. Placing human rights at the centre of conflict and
atrocity agendas is essential for effective prevention, and requires systematic
cooperation between the Human Rights Council, within its mandate, and
other relevant UN mechanisms. We encourage all pillars of the UN system to
consider and make use of the vast information that Geneva-based UN human

rights mechanisms provide, including the work carried out by independent
investigative mechanisms mandated by the HRC. In addition, we also
encourage greater exchange and interaction between the HRC and the Third
Committee in order to further enhance consistency and coherence. Lastly, we
also encourage the UN Joint Office on the Prevention of Genocide and the
Responsibility to Protect to provide regular briefings to member states in both
Geneva and New York.
Madame Chair,
We recognize the crucial role that Geneva-based human rights mechanisms
play to bridge the gap between human rights and the development and peace
and security agenda and vice versa. However, in your opinion, how can UN
development and peace and security mechanisms in New York and elsewhere
better collaborate with Geneva-based human rights institutions?
Thank you.

