Statement	  delivered	  by	  Argentina	  –	  Informal	  Interactive	  Dialogue	  on	  R2P,	  6	  September	  2016	  
[TRANSLATION]	  

	  
Thank	  you	  very	  much,	  Mr.	  Chair,	  	  
	  
First	   of	   all,	   Argentina	   welcomes	   the	   eight	   report	   of	   the	   Secretary-­‐General	   on	   the	   Responsibility	   to	  
Protect,	   which	   highlights	   the	   critical	   importance	   of	   mobilizing	   collective	   action	   to	   protect	   populations	  
from	  crimes	  against	  humanity.	  	  
	  
Therefore,	   we	   would	   also	   like	   	   to	   thank	   the	   presence	   of	   the	   president	   of	   the	   General	   Assembly,	   Mogens	  
Likketoft,	  and	  to	  highlight	  the	  valuable	  interventions	  of	  Mr.	  the	  Vice	  Secretary-­‐General	  Jan	  Eliasson	  and	  
of	  the	  distinguished	  panelists.	  
	  
More	  then	  ten	  years	  after	  having	  adopted	  the	  principle	  of	  the	  Responsibility	  to	  Protect,	  we	  consider	  that	  
it	   is	   adequate	   to	   assess	   the	   future	   challenges	   in	   order	   to	   provide	   concrete	   guidelines	   to	   the	   next	  
Secretary-­‐General.	  	  
	  
As	   equals	   and	   sovereigns,	   the	   States	   have	   reciprocal	   rights	   and	   responsibilities,	   and	   we	   understand	   in	  
that	   sense	   that	   all	   States	   are	   equally	   committed	   to	   the	   protection	   of	   their	   populations	   from	   atrocious	  
crimes.	  	  
	  
In	   the	   United	   Nations,	   we	   have	   developed	   an	   framework	   of	   implementation	   based	   on	   three	  
fundamental	   and	   interrelated	   pillars,	   which	   has	   been	   consolidated	   into	   various	   institutions	   of	   the	  
General	  Assembly	  and	  the	  Security	  Council.	  	  
	  
However,	  beyond	  the	  progress	  achieved	  during	  this	  decade,	  we	  still	  have	  to	  face	  some	  challenges,	  both	  
in	  implementing	  R2P	  and	  in	  facing	  the	  new	  complexities	  and	  threats	  from	  which	  populations	   around	  the	  
world	  are	  suffering	  today.	  
	  
The	   phenomenon	   of	   terrorism	   and	   the	   activities	   of	   non-­‐State	   actors	   who	   disseminate	   violent	   extremism	  
represent	  a	  major	  challenge	  to	  the	  R2P.	  
	  
This	  is	  why	  we	  believe	  it	  is	  necessary	  to	  strengthen	  our	  collective	  commitment	  to	  R2P.	  
	  
In	   this	   context,	   Argentina	   believes	   that	   prevention	   is	   the	   most	   important	   dimension	   in	   protecting	  
populations	   from	   the	   four	   mentioned	   crimes,	   and	   that	   it	   carries	   with	   it	   all	   existing	   international	  
obligations	  under	  human	  rights	  law,	  international	  humanitarian	  law	  and	  refugee	  law.	  	  	  	  
	  
It	  is	  imperative	  that	  we	  consolidate	  a	  decisive	  strategy	  of	  prevention	  based	   of	   an	   impartial	   analysis	   of	  
the	  events,	  sufficient	  resources	  and	  political	  will,	  in	  order	  to	  be	  able	  to	  react	  in	  an	  opportune,	  timely,	  
organic	   and	   robust	   manner	   in	   the	   face	   of	   situations	   that	   put	   our	   populations	   at	   risk	   of	   suffering	  
horrendous	  crimes.	  	  
	  
The	   ratification	   of	   the	   Rome	   Statute	   of	   the	   International	   Criminal	   Court	   is	   essential	   in	   light	   of	   its	  
contribution	  to	  the	  fight	  against	  impunity	  and	  as	  a	  deterrent	  mechanism.	  	  
	  

Therefore,	  we	  firmly	  support	  any	  initiative	  of	  the	  United	  Nations	  aiming	  to	  implement	  prevention	  in	  a	  
cross-­‐cutting	  manner,	  such	  as	  R2P,	  peacekeeping	  operations,	  peacebuilding	  activities,	  the	  promotion	  of	  
the	  rule	  of	  law,	  the	  “Human	  Rights	  Up	  Front”	  initiative,	  among	  others.	  	  
	  
In	  this	  sense,	  Argentina	  has	  joined	  the	  ACT	  Group’s	  Code	  of	  Conduct,	  because	  its	  objectives	  match	  with	  
both	   Argentina’s	   foreign	   policy	   in	   terms	   of	   human	   rights	   and	   R2P	   and	   its	   national	   position	   regarding	   the	  
Security	  Council’s	  responsibility	  in	  the	  maintaining	  of	  international	  peace	  and	  security.	  	  
	  
The	   Code	   of	   Conduct	   represents	   a	   commitment	   to	   supporting	   a	   timely	   and	   decisive	   action	   from	   the	  
Security	   Council	   to	   prevent	   and	   end	   genocide,	   crimes	   against	   humanity	   and	   war	   crimes,	   and	   to	   ensuring	  
that	   its	   members	   will	   not	   vote	   against	   a	   credible	   draft	   resolution	   aiming	   to	   prevent	   or	  end	  those	  crimes	  
submitted	  before	  them.	  	  
	  
We	  would	  also	  like	  to	  highlight	  the	  contribution	  of	  the	  Global	  Network	  of	  R2P	  Focal	  Points,	  made	  up	  of	  
55	   Member	   States,	   among	   them	   Argentina,	   as	   a	   tool	   to	   build	   individual	   and	   collective	   capacities	   to	  
prevent	  mass	  atrocities.	  	  
	  
Sir,	  	  
	  
Argentina	  also	  highlights	  the	  positive	  role	  of	  regional	  and	  subregional	  organizations	  for	  their	  efforts	  in	  
conflict	  resolution,	  prevention,	  response	  and	  early	  warning	  in	  a	  fair,	  prudent	  and	  professional	  manner	  
and	   without	   political	   interference	   or	   double	   standards,	   in	   the	   face	   of	   threats	   that	   can	   develop	   into	  
atrocities.	  	  
	  
At	   the	   national	   level,	   it	   is	   crucial	   apply	   the	   transversal	   nature	   of	   human	   rights	   to	   public	   policies.	   The	  
agents	   from	   both	   the	   public	   sector	   and	   civil	   society	   can	   work	   together	   to	   raise	   public	   awareness	   on	  
respect	  of	  human	  rights	  and	  what	  it	  implies.	  	  
	  
Finally,	  we	  would	  like	  to	  stress	  that	  the	  use	  of	  force	  must	  only	  be	  considerer	  as	  a	  measure	  of	  last	  resort,	  
after	   every	   prevention	   effort	   has	   failed,	   in	   a	   legitimate,	   responsible	   and	   proportional	   manner,	   and	   for	  
the	   only	   purpose	   of	   implementing	   R2P	   in	   accordance	   with	   the	   principles	   of	   the	   UN	   Charter	   and	  
international	  law.	  	  
	  
Sir,	  	  
	  
To	  conclude,	  and	  to	  focus	  on	  the	  future,	  Argentina	  would	  like	  to	  reiterate	  the	  need	  to	  strengthen	  and	  
deepen	  our	  commitment	  to	  R2P,	  to	  increase	  our	  efforts	  in	  implementing	  it	  fully	  and	  to	  emphasize	  once	  
more	   the	   fundamental	   role	   of	   prevention,	   from	   a	   transversal	   and	   integral	   perspective,	   in	   all	   of	   our	  
efforts	  and	  initiatives.	  	  
	  
Thank	  you	  very	  much.	  

