Remarks at the UN General Assembly Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility
to Protect
Ambassador David Pressman
Alternate Representative to the UN for Special Political Affairs
U.S. Mission to the United Nations
New York City
September 6, 2016
AS DELIVERED
Thank you, Assistant Secretary-General Šimonović, for your leadership on this critical issue.
At the United Nations we enshrine R2P in resolutions and give it pride of place at meetings like
this. But institutionalization is meaningful only if leaders make it a priority. Rhetoric means little
if we fail to achieve action in practice.
Just last month, we were all haunted by the image of the young Syrian Omran Daqneesh as he
stoically wiped blood from his bleeding scalp onto the seat of an ambulance. He survived the
collapse of his apartment building in Aleppo, but he still faces the horrifying prospect of more
airstrikes from Russian and Syrian planes. Omran is a symbol of how politics, sectarianism, and
military gain continue in many places to get the better of R2P.
South Sudan – from which the Security Council returned from a trip just this morning – also
presents a searing picture. It was a summer of awful violence against civilians in Juba, with
hundreds of cases of sexual violence in July alone. As the Secretary-General wrote in his
devastating letter to the Security Council on South Sudan on August 10, it was outrageous that
the national security personnel charged with the protection of the civilian population were often
the very ones killing and raping them.
Then there is North Korea, where the UN Human Rights Council’s commission of inquiry
determined that “crimes against humanity have been committed…pursuant to policies
established at the highest levels of the state.” The Security Council met to discuss the situation
last December, and we hope to do so again this year – but meeting is not enough. We also hope
this year’s resolution in the Third Committee maintains the strong focus on exposing North
Korea’s egregious human rights record, particularly abuses in the prison camp system.
These crises are obviously beyond awful – and they lead me to a point I want to make about
accountability. When we talk about accountability, there are really two kinds: First, there is
political reconciliation amidst honesty about what actually happened when atrocities were
committed. Second, there is legal accountability for individuals – for perpetrators. Honesty about
the past still eludes us in some cases. Just over a year ago, a Security Council member vetoed a
resolution condemning the Srebrenica massacre as a “crime of genocide.” As we said at the time,
it was a veto of a “well-established fact,” and it did nothing to ease divisions in the Balkans. As

for accountability, there are profound practical challenges. Plans for a hybrid court for South
Sudan have been publicly undercut by the country’s divided leaders. It has been more than a year
since the then-president of Central African Republic promulgated a law to create a hybrid court
in that county – but it is still not a reality. While national will for the court has been evident,
international support has lagged. Let us begin to match our rhetoric with resources.
We recognize the importance of joint action, of commitments that enjoy the unanimous support
of the international system. Every country has an active role to play, and the United States has
taken steps in recent years to strengthen our own commitment to R2P. We have increased our
focus on early warning assessment. We have established the Atrocities Prevention Board to
ensure that genocide and mass atrocity prevention remain a priority at the highest levels of our
government.
We will continue to take such steps – though we recognize we have a long road ahead. Omran
Daqneesh still faces airstrikes and Aleppo must contend with complete besiegement. South
Sudanese women still face the risk of sexual violence from their supposed protectors. And
citizens of North Korea continue to be starved by their own government. The road ahead is not
easy by any means, but we look forward to working with every Member State in this
organization to prevent atrocities and related violence in line with the commitments we have all
made and affirm here today, consistent with the responsibility to protect.
Thank you.

