UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide on the situation in Burundi
(New York, 24 August 2016) The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, expressed his concern at inflammatory statements by public
officials that could constitute incitement to violence including, most recently, by a senior
official of the ruling CNDD-FDD political party.
In a statement on 16 August 2016 that was published on the CNDD-FDD website, Pascal
Nyabenda, who was at the time President of the CNDD-FDD party and President of the
National Assembly, suggested that the genocide in Rwanda was a fabrication of the
international community, (“montages genocidaires contre le Gouvernement dit Hutu de
Kigali”) that was used to remove the Hutu government that was in place at the time.
“This irresponsible statement could be interpreted as genocide denial”, Mr. Dieng said, “and
has the potential to inflame ethnic tensions, both within Burundi and outside its borders”. At
the 20 August meeting of the party, a new head of the CNDD-FDD was appointed but Mr.
Nyabenda continues in his role as President of the National Assembly.
The situation in Burundi continues to be marred by instability and reports of serious human
rights violations, including allegations of extra-judicial killings, disappearances, torture, and
arbitrary detention of members of the opposition, civil society and those suspected of
opposing the Government. Human rights defenders and journalists are among the hundreds of
thousands of people who have fled the country since April 2015.
In its concluding observations, issued on 11 August 2016 following a special report submitted
at the request of the United Nations Committee Against Torture (CAT), the Committee’s
international experts expressed deep concern over the hundreds of reports of torture received
and called for investigations into all cases of killings, enforced disappearances and other
violence motivated by the ethnic origin of the victim. The Committee urged the Burundian
Government to refrain from making any public statements that could exacerbate ethnic
tensions or incite violence or hatred and to ensure that public and law enforcement officials
do not accept or tolerate such acts by other groups.
Special Adviser Dieng also raised concern that the youth wing of the CNDD-FDD party,
known as the Imbonerakure, continues to be associated with human rights abuses and is
reported to have threatened ethnic violence. He noted that the Minister of the Interior of
Burundi had confirmed that the Imbonakure formed part of the national security strategy, as
the CAT also pointed out in its concluding observations.
Special Adviser Dieng reminded the Government of Burundi of its obligation to protect its
populations, regardless of their ethnicity or political affiliation, and to refrain from any action
or discourse that could inflame ethnic tensions. He highlighted the importance of countering
such messages with alternative speech to foster unity rather than further entrench divisions,
and called on all parties to prioritize inclusive dialogue to bring about an end to the protracted
crisis.
For media queries: UN Office on Prevention of Genocide and Responsibility to Protect
Ms. Taryn Lesser (Email: lesser@un.org; Phone: +1 917 367 5254)
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/

