UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

For immediate release
Statement of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, in
response to the escalation of islamophobia and homophobia following the events in
Orlando
[New York, 16 June 2016] The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, condemned the criminal attack that took place at the Pulse
nightclub in Orlando, Florida, United States, on 12 June, in which 49 people were killed
and 53 injured. He offered his sympathy for the victims and expressed grave concern at the
outpouring of hatred, homophobia and Islamophobia that followed this attack, which
targeted the Lesbian Gay Bisexual and Transsexual (LGBT) community.
Vitriolic messages were addressed at Muslims, immigrants and the LGBT community, in
particular. “At a time when there was greatest need for sympathy and solidarity, I was
appalled by the immediate and shameful efforts of some political and religious leaders to
manipulate and politicise the events in Orlando to fuel fear, intolerance and hatred. I was
particularly sickened to hear religious leaders commend the killings of members of the
LGBT community”. Mr. Dieng referred to statements by some religious leaders, including
one who labelled those killed in Orlando as “disgusting perverts and pedophiles” and
calling on governments worldwide “to execute LGBT people”. Mr. Dieng also criticized
calls by some politicians to cite radical Islam as the cause of the attack in Orlando, to ban
Muslims from the United States and to label all Muslims as “terrorists”.
“Religious and sexual minorities are subjected to discrimination, human rights violations
and violence worldwide, including in peaceful and democratic societies”, Mr. Dieng
stated. “However, they are most vulnerable during difficult times.” “It is simply
unacceptable that influential leaders, including political and religious leaders, spread the
kind of dangerous homophobic and islamophobic messages that we have seen in public
discourse and the media this week,” he said.
Special Adviser Dieng stressed that the deliberate spread of misinformation and the
manipulation of people’s fears and concerns for political gain can only contribute to
feeding division and hatred. He reminded political and religious leaders that any advocacy
of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence is prohibited under international human rights law as well as by the legislations
of many countries.
Mr. Dieng reiterated his call to political and religious leaders to publicly counter lies,
prejudice and fear, to act responsibly and with respect for both international and national
laws.
* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Simona Cruciani
United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention
and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917-367-5430
Email: cruciani@un.org

