i
t

STATEMENT

ON BEHALF OF

The Group of Friends on
the Responsibility to Protect

DELIVERED BY

Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed S, Al-Thani
Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar
to the United Nations

BEFORE

The Formal Debate of the United Nations General Assembly
ON

The Responsivity to Protect and the Prevention of

Genocide War Crimes Ethnic Cleansing and Crimes
Against Humanity
UN Headquarters - New York
25 June 2018

P/ease check against delivery

Permanent Mission of the State of Qatar to the United Nations
809 UN Plaza, 4^ Fl., New York, NY 10017 - Tel: 212-486-9335 - Fax: 212-758-4952

Mr. President

I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, consisting of 50 Member States and the European Union, and cochaired this year by Italy and the State of Qatar.

We would like to thank the President ofthe General Assembly and the Secretary-General for

their statements and Australia and Ghana for their leadership in including the responsibility
to protect on the agenda of this UNGA. We would like also to thank the Secretary-General

for his report entitled "The Responsibility to Protect: From Eariy Warning to Early Action".
We commend his prioritization of early warning and early action to prevent genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and for recognizing that R2P is a key
element of this important agenda. We welcome the report's recommendations and
encourage Member States to implement them.

The commitment made by all UN Member States to R2P at the World Summit in 2005 was

historic. The Group of Friends reaffirms its strong commitment to paragraph 138, 139 and
140 of the World Summit Outcome Document and the three pillars of R2P.

Today marks the first UN General Assembly formal debate on the Responsibility to Protect
since 2009. The inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda of the General Assembly reflects the
will of the wider UN membership to the prevention of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing. We urge the UN membership to consider the merits of the
permanent inclusion of this item on the UNGA formal agenda. Continued dialogue in the
General Assembly will promote the building of consensus in relation to what the
international community can do to prevent these heinous crimes.
Mr. President,

The acceptance of R2P through the World Summit Outcome Document remains a key
commitment of the international community to protect populations that face the threat of

genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and ethnic cleansing. At this time, the Group

would like to reiterate its common understanding that the responsibility to protect
reinforces, rather than undermines, State sovereignty. As the Secretary-General underlined in

the presentation of his priorities to the General Assembly earlier this year, it is necessary to
"overcome the false contradiction between human rights and national sovereignty. Human

rights and national sovereignty go hand in hand. The achievement of human rights
strengthens States and societies, thereby reinforcing sovereignty. States with effective,
accountable institutions are among .the best defenders of human rights."
Since 2005, considerable progress has been made by the UN, Member States and other

stakeholders, including civil society, in operationalizing our commitment to R2P at the
national, regional and international levels. International and national actors have been

successful in creating frameworks for identifying risks, developing early warning mechanisms,
articulating inhibitors of atrocity crimes and creating new institutional mechanisms. Today's
formal debate gives States an important opportunity to share national experiences and best
practices and effective strategies for preventing atrocities.

Over the past decade, we have seen the creation and expansion of the Group of Friends on
R2P in both New York and Geneva, the establishment and growth of the Global Network of

R2P Focal Points, the inclusion of R2P in at least 69 Security Council Resolutions, including
in the mandates of a number of UN Peace Operations, and in resolutions of the Human

Rights Council. Important initiatives like the Code of Conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes, the Framework ofAnalysis

for Atrocity Crimes and Human Rights Up Front have supported efforts to prevent atrocity
crimes and continue to serve as important tools for mainstreaming atrocity prevention and
strengthening prevention capacities.

The prevention of atrocities is at the core of each of the three pillars of R2P, and Member
States should better utilize the entire UN system to effectively prevent and respond to their
perpetration. As the 2018 report of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect
suggests, we should make a concerted effort to continue to report on progress towards
implementation of the responsibility to protect and bring situations of imminent risk of
atrocity crimes to the attention of the General Assembly, Security Council, and Human

Rights Council, as needed. For example, the Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic
Review is well placed to support preventive efforts, and we encourage Member States to
better utilize the UPR processes as a preventive mechanism. This year we mark the 70th

anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was created in response to

violent conflict in order to prevent future violent conflicts. As well as embodying the
international community's commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights for
all individuals around the world, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the treaties
that derive from it, are, in the words of the Secretary General, the "best prevention tool we
have".

The General Assembly should also play a more active role in supporting States in their

efforts to carry out their primary responsibility to protect their populations. The Security
Council should consider situations where there is potential for mass atrocities at the earliest
possible stage, including through utilizing working methods such as situational awareness
briefings and Arria-Formula meetings.

We also strongly emphasize the role of women in the prevention of atrocity crimes, as they
are crucial for early warning and peacebuilding, promoting cooperation, capacity building,
and the creation of more cohesive and inclusive societies. We should take concrete steps to
end all forms of discrimination on the basis of gender and to empower women as agents of
atrocity prevention, including by ensuring that all girls have equal access to quality
education.

As recognized in the Secretary General's report mobilization of all resources at our disposal
is required and broadening the constituency of actors engaged in atrocity prevention is
needed. In this respect we specifically welcome recent efforts by the General Assembly and
Security Council to recognize and promote the participation of youth in conflict prevention
and resolution.

Accountability for the perpetrators of atrocity crimes is among the most effective ways of
preventing recurrence. States have the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
international crimes committed within their jurisdiction and national accountability efforts

should be encouraged and supported, including through the strengthening of judicial
cooperation between States.

We urge States to comply with their international legal obligations and thoroughly
investigate and prosecute persons responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes, or other serious violations of international law, as well as to strengthen Judicial
cooperation with other States for this purpose. International investigative mechanisms,
including fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry, can support efforts to promote

accountability and bring situations of concern to the attention of States. Additionally,
international courts and hybrid tribunals, including the International Criminal Court, provide
complementary avenues in appropriate circumstances to enable accountability.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for the United Nations Office on Genocide

Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, and we encourage the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. The Special Adviser and the Joint
Office have a key role in assisting Member States in the operationalization of R2P.
We reiterate the significance of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the

Crime of Genocide as an effective international instrument for the prevention and
punishment of the crime of genocide. To mark the 70th anniversary of the adoption of the
Genocide Convention on 9 December 2018, the Special Adviser on the Prevention of

Genocide has launched an appeal for its universal ratification, which is supported by the
Secretary-General. We strongly encourage States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the
Convention to consider doing so as a matter of high priority and to ensure its

implementation at the national level. Ratifying and complying with the Convention is an
affirmation of the commitment of "never again".

We recognize the important role national and international civil society can play in
supporting the further advancement and implementation of R2P. In particular, we would like
to thank the Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect for their invaluable work as
Secretariat of the Group of Friends, both in New York and Geneva.
Mr. President,

At a time when more than 68.5 million people are displaced as a result of armed conflict,

atrocities and persecution worldwide, we hope that during this debate we can collectively
identify implementable strategies that can effectively prevent atrocities and protect
populations around the world from atrocities.

Thank you.

