Ghana’s Statement at the 2016 UN General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion, From
Commitment to Implementation: Ten Years of Responsibility to Protect [Transcribed]
26 February 2016
Thank you, Mr. Moderator, and I wish to express my thanks to the President of the General
Assembly for convening this thematic panel discussion. The panelists have provided us very
useful insights into the important concept of the Responsibility to Protect.
10 years after the endorsement of all member states of the world summit outcome document, it
is important to review and assess how the principle has been operationalized and worked
towards addressing challenges and broaden acceptance within the International Community.
There is no denying that in the face of the growing conflict and crises in our world today, RtoP
remains relevant, both in an expression of political commitment and as a framework for action to
prevent genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and ethnic cleansing. All of our
panelists have underscored the importance of the principle of observing the 3 equal pillars,
paying due attention to the national and international early warning systems, capabilities, and
responses. In general, prevention is the approach to RtoP is pivotal to the success of the
principle.
The 10­year anniversary is the opportune moment to take steps forward, and to build on articles
138 and 139 of the world summit outcome document. We share the view that continuing the
concentration on the challenges, as well as successes and priorities, is important and has been
well elaborated and spelled out clearly by the distinguished panelists. We would like to stress
the necessity of widening the network for focal points and strengthening national capacities for
prevention. These will be critical to upholding the Responsibility to Protect. The work of the
special advisors on the prevention of genocide, and Responsibility to Protect, will be pivotal and
must be supported with necessary resources.
Finally, Mr. President, Ghana is a member of the cross­regional group that initiated the zero text
of the resolution to commemorate the 10th anniversary of RtoP, and remains supportive of an
open and transparent process of consultations with all member states that would enable us to
arrive at a consensual approach to the RtoP and acknowledge issues that must addressed in
terms of implementation.
It is our hope that the next decade will witness closer engagement and progress for the sake of
humanity. Thank you, Mr. Moderator.

