Statement delivered by the Delegation of the Republic of Sudan to the United Nations, at
the United Nations General Assembly Thematic Panel Discussion on "From commitment
to implementation: Ten years of the Responsibility to Protect," convened by the President
of the General Assembly [Unofficial Transcription]
26 February 2016
Allow me to thank the President of the Assembly, the Secretary-General, and other speakers.
First of all, I would like to comment on Mr. Evans’ statement, in which he referred to my President
in a very disrespectful way. He may have forgotten that he is a guest here and he must be
respectful. He must respect whoever hosts him. However, this activist might still be reading from
the rules of history that have spread chaos in Africa, that have looted their resources and their
wealth, and therefore, he speaks as a Supreme, as if he is preaching to the people of Africa and
he has forgotten that these people are now free and they will no longer want to be oppressed
and occupied by states that would loot their resources once again.
The principle is noble. However, this is yet another tool for occupation. Everyone who delivered a
statement today, they had a common position. Therefore, what we see today is a monologue and
not a dialogue. Any attempt to actually apply this concept must be within a framework of
understanding. This will entrench the differences between member states.
Once again, I call on him to respect the forum of the United Nations. We represent our states
and our presidents. Therefore, we do not want to see any guests disrespecting our presidents.
Therefore, I call upon the Moderator of this dialogue to ensure that this happens because what
we heard is one point. This is one symphony that some states would like to hear. However, there
are other states that want to hear another symphony because this concept is still being debated.
There are no differences around the need to protect civilians. However, there are differences
around this very concept. Everything that has happened ever since has not served this noble
purpose. Some people want to actually manipulate states once again. This is yet another form of
occupation.
Let us debate this and I stress we must have a dialogue and not a monologue. What is
happening today is a monologue. It is a one-man show where they are talking about one point of
view without taking into consideration the points of view of other people.
Thank you.

