Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the
Secretary-General
19 June 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honor to deliver this statement on behalf of the 51 members of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
We thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights for his tireless efforts to promote
and protect human rights and for his strong voice on situations where his Office observed
evidence of alleged atrocities. We call upon the next High Commissioner, in accordance
with his or her mandate, to continue highlighting gross human rights violations and
abuses and assisting the international community to fulfill its responsibility to protect and
prevent atrocities.
The reports and updates of the High Commissioner and his Office, as well as of special
procedures mandate-holders, can constitute early warning tools that should prompt States
to prevent genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing both
nationally and internationally. By addressing specific situations of concern, reviewing the
human rights situations in States via the Universal Periodic Review, and making
recommendations for action, the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms also play an
important role in advancing the prevention of mass atrocities.
Mr. President,
Later this year the international community will observe the seventieth anniversaries of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, as well as the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute. Respect for the rule of law is especially important at a time when the basic tenets
of international law are being violated by state and non-state actors.
As we reflect upon the international community’s efforts to uphold the Universal
Declaration and the Genocide Convention, we acknowledge the important role played by
human rights mechanisms and independent investigations mandated by this Council in
documenting gross violations and abuses of human rights, identifying those responsible,
and offering options to address them and prevent them from reoccurring.
In that regard, the Group of Friends of R2P notes the Human Rights Council’s attention
at its 38th session to the situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar, the situation in Syria, and
the situation in the Kasai regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. President,

Nearly 66 million people are currently displaced by conflict, persecution and mass
atrocities. As the international community faces this global refugee and displacement
crisis, we have witnessed worrying rising signs of xenophobia and incitement to violence
based upon identity. As the UN Framework of Analysis for mass atrocity crimes notes,
discriminatory and exclusionary practices or policies, as well as acts of incitement or hate
propaganda targeting particular groups or individuals, may serve as a warning sign of
mass atrocity risks. We acknowledge the preventative role of human rights mechanisms,
including special procedures mandate-holders, in raising awareness of these risks in
accordance with their mandates and encourage Member States to highlight national best
practices for addressing racism, racial discrimination and rising levels of xenophobia and
incitement to hate crimes while fully respecting human rights in their submissions to the
Universal Periodic Review.
Mr. President,
The Group of Friends of R2P welcomes next week’s General Assembly Debate on the
Responsibility to Protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing,
and crimes against humanity. We call on Member States to consider the formal inclusion
of the Responsibility to Protect, including its full implementation, on the agenda of the
UN General Assembly to enable its continued consideration in accordance with General
Assembly resolution A/RES/63/308. We further welcome the 10th annual report of the
Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect, “From early warning to early action,”
and strongly encourage Member States to highlight the critical role that the High
Commissioner, the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms can play in providing
early warning and mobilizing a response in accordance to their mandates.
The international community should continue to prioritise early warning and early action
on preventing human rights violations and violent conflict in accordance with the UN
Charter.
Thank you.
	  
	  

