STATEMENT
ON BEHALF OF

The Group of Friends on
the Responsibility to Protect
DELIVERED BY

Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed S. Al-Thani
Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar
to the United Nations
BEFORE

The Open Debate of the United Nations Security Council
ON

Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict
UN Headquarters - New York
22 May 2018

Please check against delivery

Permanent Mission of the State of Qatar to the United Nations
809 UN Plaza, 4th Fl., New York, NY 10017 - Tel: 212-486-9335 - Fax: 212-758-4952

Madam President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of 50 Member States
and the European Union, and co-chaired this year by Italy and the State of
Qatar.
The Group would like to thank Poland for organizing today’s
important Open Debate. I also would like to extend our gratitude to
Secretary-General António Guterres, to the Director-General of the ICRC,
Mr. Yves Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association for their highly informative briefings.
Madam President,
Today we bear witness to a continuing and pervasive degradation of
respect for civilian lives and an appalling disregard for the norms and laws
that the international community established to alleviate the effects of
armed conflict. The results are tremendous human suffering and a high risk
of mass atrocity crimes. Although all States have a responsibility to protect
their populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing, more than 65 million people are currently displaced as a
result of conflict, atrocities and persecution worldwide. The commission
of systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law in situations of armed
conflict may constitute a threat to international peace and security.
It is within this context that the Group of Friends would like to stress
the following points:
Firstly, full and effective compliance with international law is
fundamental to the protection of civilians. Many civilian deaths, as well as
suffering and displacement, could be avoided if all parties to conflicts
respected international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Secondly, it is of the utmost importance that States put in place
appropriate legislative and institutional arrangements to comprehensively
address violations of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights, and hold those who commit such violations and
abuses accountable. Accountability for serious violations of the law of
armed conflict and human rights violations and abuses not only helps
provide justice for victims, but also deters future violations and abuses.
1

States have the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
crimes committed within their jurisdiction, and national accountability
efforts should be encouraged and supported, including through the
strengthening of judicial cooperation between states. International
investigative and judicial mechanisms, including fact-finding missions,
commissions of inquiry, international courts and hybrid tribunals —
including the International Criminal Court in circumstances that are
properly within its jurisdiction —provide complementary avenues to
enable accountability when and where national options prove insufficient.
Thirdly, we are witnessing widespread attacks directed against
civilian infrastructure, such as healthcare facilities and schools. Let’s not
forget that deliberate or indiscriminate attacks against medical facilities
and civilian infrastructures such as schools, as well as on the civilian
population, including humanitarian workers, may amount to war crimes.
In recent years, there has been a pattern of attacks on schools,
students, teachers and other education personnel by state security forces or
non-state armed groups. In 2016, the UN was able to verify 753 attacks on
schools and hospitals. From May 2016 to today, the ICRC has registered
in 16 countries alone over 1,200 incidents of violence against healthcare
facilities or personnel. Practically, an incident of violence against
healthcare facilities or personnel has taken place every single week since
the passage of UN Security Council Resolution 2286, regarding the
protection of medical and humanitarian personnel and facilities.
Fourthly, protection of civilians should be sensitive to gender
considerations. Security Council resolutions on Women, Peace and
Security note that armed conflict and emergencies have a differential
impact on women, girls, men and boys. Women’s needs must be
considered and addressed. The Group urges the United Nations and other
relevant actors to ensure that affected populations, including women, are
involved in the development of protection of civilians strategies and
activities.
Lastly, journalists play an important role in bringing attention to
conflict situations and mobilizing action in situations where atrocity crimes
are committed. Independent reporting can put pressure on political actors
to find solutions to conflicts and can contribute to promoting
accountability. According to Reporters without Borders, more than 1,000
professional journalists have been killed in the past 15 years - with an
2

average of two deaths per week, and more than 24 already killed in 2018.
Member states should create and maintain a safe and enabling environment
for journalists reporting in conflict situations.
Madam President,
Far too many civilians are killed in both direct and indiscriminate
attacks in today’s complex and protracted conflicts. The international
community should make every effort to assist civilians caught up in these
conflicts. The Members of the Security Council should take timely and
decisive action aimed at ending and preventing atrocities and not hinder
credible efforts to this end.
Finally, the surest way to protect civilian populations is by investing
in the prevention of conflict and peaceful settlements of dispute, based on
the principles of justice and international law.
Thank you.

3

