UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide, on his visit to the Central African Republic

1. (Bangui, 11 October 2017). The mission I undertook to the Central African Republic from 6 to
11 October, came following worrisome reports about the resurgence of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, including sexual violence, against a backdrop
of confrontations between armed groups and the manipulation of religion, ethnic sensibilities and
community origins observed from the south-east to the north-west of the country. I had the
opportunity to bring together the authorities, national actors, representatives of armed groups,
victims and international partners to initiate a dialogue on urgent, concerted and coordinated
steps to be taken to put an end to the violence, defuse the intercommunity tensions and alleviate
the suffering of the civilian population.
2. In Bria, which I visited with the Minister of Defence, two local parliamentarians and the Chair
of the National Committee for the Prevention of Criminal Atrocities, I was able to discuss with
key actors and to see, with regret and consternation, the systematic destruction of the homes of
civilians, many of whom were forced to flee. I received similar reports from Bangassou,
Mobaye, Alindao, Bocaranga, Nieme and Gambo about serious violations against the civilian
population, particularly women and children, for allegedly belonging to certain ethnic and/or
religious groups belonging and/or being affiliated with armed groups. It is time to condemn these
unacceptable manipulations that sow the seeds of division and wrongfully justify the horrors
reported to me by victims, the authorities, civil society representatives and religious and
community leaders.
3. I condemn in the strongest possible terms the manipulation and incitement to ethnic and
religious hatred instigated by armed groups and militias and accomplice politicians, with the aim
of establishing territorial control, mobilizing combatants or extending their predatory instincts to
private property and the country’s economic resources. I also condemn in the strongest possible
terms the attacks carried out against MINUSCA and humanitarian personnel in the performance
of their duties to support civilians. Any individual responsible for criminal atrocities or
incitement to commit such atrocities will sooner or later have to assume criminal responsibility
for their acts and face national or international justice. I therefore I encourage all efforts made
jointly by MINUSCA and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
cooperation with the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, to monitor and document messages of hate and incitement to violence, to identify their
perpetrators and instigators, and to ensure that their acts do not go unpunished.
4. All the victims made it clear to me that their wish was to live together in peace and harmony
with all the people of the Central African Republic. Christian, Muslim and Peuhl civilians are
taken hostage by armed groups. The people of Bria, Bangassou, Mobaye and Alindao are all
calling for their towns to once again be weapons-free, and they all aspire to return to their
respective communities.

5. I shared with President Touadera the concerns observed during the visit regarding the
seriousness and scope of the criminal atrocities committed in the hinterland with impunity by
armed groups. He believes that urgent steps must be taken to combat the attempts at ethnic or
religious division. He also reiterated to me his determination to continue the dialogue with the
armed groups, in order to ensure that they put down their weapons.
6. He is also convinced that violence must be condemned in no uncertain terms, regardless of its
source or of the victims or the perpetrators, in order to break the cycle of impunity. The
authorities, institutions, women’s groups and opinion leaders that I met also expressed the same
position to me.
7. I call on the Government of the Central African Republic and all the parties concerned to
commit resolutely to dialogue, in accordance with the consolidated road map of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, but without sacrificing
the need to strengthen the rule of law, to restore good governance and to combat impunity.
8. All the people I met said they were very hopeful, in the light of the restoration of State
authority, security sector reform and the DDR process, which all present opportunities for
strengthening the capacity to prevent criminal atrocities and protect the civilian population.

For media queries please contact:
Martine Nouma
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/
Phone: +1 212-963-0904; Email: nouma@un.org

