STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF

The Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect
DELIVERED BY

His Excellency Ambassador Martin
Bille Hermann
Permanent Representative of Denmark to
the United Nations
DURING

The Formal Debate of the UN General
Assembly
UN Headquarters - New York 27 June 2019

Mr. President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of 51 Member
States and the European Union, and this year co-chaired by Denmark
and Qatar.
Today marks the third UN General Assembly formal debate on the
Responsibility to Protect. We welcome the UN member’s support for
the inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda, over the past two years. It
also reflects the strong interest of the members to share ideas and
best practices about how we can collectively improve our ability to
prevent genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing. We believe the General Assembly should continue this
practice of open and frank debate – a practice repeatedly
recommended by the Secretary-General.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect takes stock of past practice and includes lessons learned for
prevention.

The

recommendations

Group
for

welcomes

implementing

the
and

Secretary-General’s
integrating

the

responsibility to protect as an important part of his broader strategy
to prioritize prevention across all pillars of the UN’s work. We
appreciate his sustained commitment to the implementation of the
Human Rights Up Front initiative, thereby strengthening the UN
system’s ability to prevent the most serious human rights violations
from happening, including those that possibly lead to the commission
of atrocities. The Group commends the Secretary-General and his
Special Advisers on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to
Protect for their leadership in advancing mass atrocity prevention. As

this is the first time Ms. Smith joins us in the General Assembly as the
Special Adviser on R2P, we especially would like to welcome her.
Since 2005, considerable progress has been achieved by the UN,
Member States and other stakeholders, including civil society, in
advancing atrocity prevention at the national, regional and
international levels. International and domestic actors have
successfully created frameworks to identify triggers and risks,
develop

indicators

and

early

warning

mechanisms,

and

institutionalize prevention mechanisms and partnerships. As a
Group of Friends, we have also worked towards conceptually linking
R2P, where appropriate, to other related agendas, including
Peacekeeping; the Protection of Civilians; Women, Peace and
Security; Sustaining Peace; and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Today’s formal debate provides States with an important opportunity
to share experiences, best practices, and effective strategies for
preventing atrocities. In this context, it is worth highlighting that
almost a third of all UN Member States have appointed a national
R2P Focal Point and joined the Global Network of R2P Focal Points
– the largest governmental network dedicated to preventing mass
atrocities.
Currently we are witnessing a divided Security Council unable to take
timely and decisive action in multiple atrocity situations. At the same
time, the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council can play
an important role in responding to atrocity crimes, as demonstrated
by the establishment of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for crimes committed in Syria. This success is a direct
result of concerted efforts by Member States committed to holding

those responsible for atrocities accountable for their actions. We
recognize that the primary responsibility to protect lies with Member
States, but should peaceful means be inadequate and national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations the
international community should be prepared to take collective action,
in a timely and decisive manner, through the Security Council.
We also commend the initiatives of Member States to bring
perpetrators of atrocity crimes to justice. Such crimes include war
crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide, as reflected in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

Domestic

accountability measures for atrocities are among the most effective
ways to prevent recurrence. States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute genocide, torture, and other such crimes
committed within their jurisdiction and national accountability
efforts should be encouraged and supported, including through the
strengthening of judicial cooperation between States. Fact-finding
missions, investigative mechanisms, commissions of inquiry, hybrid
and international courts and tribunals provide complementary
avenues to enable accountability when and where options under
domestic law prove insufficient.
Mr. President,
While accountability is important to prevent recurrence, our ultimate
objective is to prevent atrocity crimes from occurring in the first
place. Prevention is at the core of each of the three pillars of R2P, and
Member States should identify complementary agendas where UN
efforts can assist in preventing atrocities. For example, the
interaction between the Human Rights Council and the Security

Council could be strengthened to better inform the latter about
situations that may lead to atrocity crimes. Measures taken by States
to prevent atrocity crimes can also contribute to national and regional
peace and stability and reinforce national sovereignty.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides a
framework for global cooperation to achieve a better and more
sustainable future – and can significantly contribute to atrocity
prevention efforts. Eradicating poverty, providing development
assistance, and supporting capacity and institution building can
address grievances and instability that may drive the perpetration of
atrocity crimes.
No country or region is immune to the risk factors for atrocity crimes.
We are increasingly concerned about the rising levels of incitement
to discrimination, hostility and violence in all its forms, as well as hate
speech and xenophobia, in many parts of the world. As SecretaryGeneral Antonio Guterres has said, “Hatred is a threat to everyone –
and so this is a job for everyone.”
We also strongly support an inclusive approach to preventing
atrocity crimes — one that recognizes the critical role women play in
early warning, promoting peacebuilding, peacekeeping, capacity
building, and more cohesive, inclusive and resilient societies. We
should take concrete steps to end all forms of gender-based
discrimination and violence and to empower women as agents of
change, including by ensuring all women have access to quality
education and to meaningfully participate in the decision-making
processes affecting their lives. We recognize the important role
national and international civil society organizations play in

supporting the advancement and implementation of R2P. In
particular, we would like to thank the Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect for its invaluable work as the Secretariat of
the Group of Friends, both in New York and Geneva.
Mr. President,
According to the UN Refugee Agency, the number of forcibly
displaced people as a result of persecution, conflict and atrocities is
at its highest level since the end of the Second World War – 70.8
million in 2018, and this number continues to increase. This figure
demonstrates why upholding the responsibility to protect needs to be
at the heart of our shared mission to advance peace and security.
Today, during this Formal Debate, we look forward to hearing from
Member States on best practices to end the current climate of
impunity and inaction with regard to the heightening risk of atrocity
crimes across the globe. Let this debate be a reminder of the
importance to continue this exchange of information and the need to
strengthen

our

individual

and

collective

prevention

and

accountability response
The era of indifference is over, but the time of consistent and timely
action to prevent and protect has not yet begun. As the SecretaryGeneral noted repeatedly in his report: “More needs to be done.” Let
us speed the day.
Thank you.

