UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
Media Briefing by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide on Mission to South Sudan

(Juba, 30 April 2014), The United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Kimoon, asked the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay and I
(his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide) to visit South Sudan
this week to follow up on the recent brutal attacks against civilians in the
northern town of Bentiu, where people were killed even in places of worship
and hospitals, and within a United Nations base in Bor, where IDPs were
sheltering. Of particular concern to us, also, were reports of the use of the
radio in Bentiu to incite ethnic violence, including sexual violence against
women.
As the High commissioner has informed you, we have held consultations in
South Sudan with senior government leaders, including with President Salva
Kiir and some of his ministers, civil society, displaced persons and the
leader of SPLA/M in Opposition, Dr. Riek Machar. From these consultations
and other available reports, it is clear that the conflict has taken a dangerous
trajectory, and civilians are being deliberately targeted based on their
ethnicity and perceived political affiliation.
My primary focus is the prevention of genocide and other related atrocity
crimes. My office advocates for measures to protect populations from being
targeted on the basis of their identity. What is happening in this country has
put the population at high risk of serious violence. In our meetings, we have
reiterated and reminded the President and the government that the state has a
primary responsibility to protect all South Sudanese, irrespective of their
ethnic, national or political affiliation.
UNMISS is doing its best under very difficult circumstances. South Sudan
leaders must assume higher responsibility to ensure that those under their
authority do not commit serious violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law. They should send strong messages to call for the unity
and respect of all South Sudanese and take immediate measures to end the
violence. I am glad that in our meetings this week they have both affirmed
the will to do this. I hope that they will now take concrete steps to act on
their commitments.

As we search for peace in this young nation, we must also ensure that those
responsible for crimes committed here must be held to account. There can be
no peace without justice. The current culture of impunity will only serve to
undermine our efforts. We have learned this the hard way, from events in
other places, including from the genocide that took place 20 years ago in
Rwanda. To the survivors of the genocide, we owe a pledge to take all
possible measures within our power to protect populations from another
Rwanda. There is no excuse for inaction.
In this regard, I welcome the IGAD mediation efforts and the role of the
African Union led Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan aimed at ending
the violence and bring justice to the victims. The region should strive further
and take urgent measures to end the violence. To paraphrase the President of
Kenya, who is also the chairman of the East African community, recently
stated as follows:
“ It is heart-wrenching for us in IGAD, EAC, African Union and indeed the
wider global community to sit and watch atrocities being committed on daily
basis. This must be put to a stop.” He further he called upon all parties to
bring their military activities and killing of innocent people to an immediate
end and bring to account those involved. This is a very welcome and I urge
all the regional leaders to support South Sudan in this effort.
South Sudan should not be led down this slippery slope. As I leave Juba, I
beseech everyone; the South Sudanese, your leaders, the regional and the
international community, to take immediate measures to end the violence
and uphold our collective responsibility to protect the populations of South
Sudan from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Ethnicity should not be used as a reason to incite violence or
demonise and exclude any community or section of the population. The
world is watching. Those responsible for serious violations must be held
accountable.
South Sudanese should also engage on genuine reconciliation, that will
ensure they coexist as one people. Their diversity should not be used to
divide them but should be their strengthen to live as one nation. Everyone in
this country has a role to contribute towards this end. I encourage the
government to engage with all actors, including the civil society, community
and religious leaders as you forge for peace. remain vigilant to end the

violence and ensure peace. This is your country and you have even a bigger
responsibility to bring peace to south sudan.
Thank you
Adama Dieng,
Under Secretary-General/ Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide

