UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

The statement of Under Secretary-General/Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide Mr. Adama Dieng on the human rights and humanitarian dimensions of the
crisis in the Central African Republic
22 January 2014

Mr. President, members of the Council, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen.
I thank the Permanent Missions of Jordan and Luxembourg, particularly His Excellency
Ambassador Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein and Her Excellency Ambassador Sylvie
Lucas, for convening this briefing on the human rights and humanitarian dimensions of the
crisis in the Central African Republic.

Mr. President, as you are aware, I visited the Central African Republic between 17 and 21
December 2013 together with my colleagues Leila Zerrougui, the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict and Nancee Bright, who represented Zainab Bangura, the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Our main objective was to assess the risk of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity (atrocity crimes) occurring in the country
and to advocate with transitional authorities and other relevant stakeholders for a cessation of
violence and enhanced protection of the civilian population.
It was evident from what we saw and heard that the situation in Central African Republic was
desperate. We received reports, and testimonies from victims and witnesses, that told of
shocking episodes of violence perpetrated against innocent Central Africans, including women
and children. And this violence continues, even as we are discussing the human rights and
humanitarian situation in CAR today.
As I said in my previous statement at the “Arria formula” meeting of the Security Council on
1 November 2013, we face a situation of widespread and massive violations of human rights
and abuses, such as has never been witnessed before in the country. There have been
widespread reports of summary executions and other forms of extrajudicial killings;
enforced disappearances; forced displacement; and acts of mutilation and sexual violence
committed against adults and children, as well as the destruction and widespread looting of
property, including hospitals, schools, churches and mosques.
At the same time, as you will hear in greater detail from my colleague ASG Kyung-Wha Kang,
the humanitarian situation is equally very disturbing. Thousands have fled to seek refuge in
neighboring countries, while some 902,000 people have been displaced across the country. In

Bangui, which has witnessed the highest level of violence, one in every two residents has been
displaced from their homes.
Who is Responsible?
In response to continued attacks by ex-Séléka elements targeting Christian civilians since
December 2012, traditional, community-based self-defence groups across the country evolved
into a more organised Christian militia known as the “anti-Balaka”, which has targeted exSéléka members and Muslim civilians suspected of supporting the ex-Séléka. Reports received
indicate that the anti-Balaka militia are getting more organized than before and reportedly
include some former army soldiers sympathetic to former President Bozize. These former
soldiers have reportedly played a leadership role in organizing attacks against Muslim
civilians. For example, attacks in Bangui on 5 and 6 December resulted in the death of at least
1,000 people, most of whom were ex-Séléka members and Muslim civilians. In interviews
with some individuals who claimed to be members of anti-Balaka militia in Bangui, they
alleged that the militia have deployed in all the sixteen provinces in the country to mobilize
Christian civilians against Muslim civilians.
On the other hand, the ex-Séléka elements continue to carry out attacks against Christian
civilians throughout the country. While in CAR, we received testimonies who witnessed the
killing of Christian civilians by ex-Séléka during a series of reprisal attacks.
The religious leaders in Bossangoa had divergent views on who bear responsibility for the ongoing violence in the Province. The Bishop of Bossangoa Diocese, decried the abuses
committed against Christians and the perceived complicity of the Muslim communities. On the
other hand, the representative of the Muslim community in Bossangoa decried continued
attacks against Muslims by anti-Balaka who, in his view, were being hosted and supported by
the local Catholic bishop.
In consultations with the then Head of Transition, Michel Djotodia, I stated to him clearly that
he bears primary responsibility for security and that he should take all measures possible to
protect all populations, irrespective of their ethnic or religious affiliation. We urged Mr.
Djotodia to join forces with religious leaders and civil society to immediately embark on a
reconciliation campaign aimed at putting an end to the violence and to the hatred between
communities.
The Sectarian Element of the Conflict
Mr. President, the violence that was initially perceived as a confrontation between ex-Séléka
and anti-Balaka militia quickly evolved into a very dangerous confrontation between Muslim
and Christian civilians and the level of hatred between these communities shocked me.
Incitement to commit violence on the basis of religion or ethnicity and deliberate and targeted
attacks against civilians based on their identity are both factors that indicate a high risk both of
crimes against humanity and of genocide.
-2-

Protection of the Civilian Population
There is no doubt that the actions of the African Union peacekeeping force known as MISCA
and of French troops have contributed immensely to the protection of Central Africans,
particularly in and around IDP camps. However, it is evident that their resources and capacity
to protect are limited, given the scale of the violence and the fact that it is happening across the
country MISCA is still only partially deployed. There is an urgent need for the full deployment
of MISCA peacekeepers as soon as possible.
Another concern emerging from our mission and which has had a negative impact on civilian
protection was the perception by some that peacekeepers deployed in the country were not
neutral. Some interlocutors alleged that peacekeepers, in some instances, are perceived to side
either with anti-Balaka or ex-Séléka elements, which has eroded trust in some instances and
affected their capacity to act.
In our interaction with religious leaders, we noted that despite concerted efforts by the
Archbishop and the Imam of Bangui to promote peace and dialogue, the impact of the
initiatives undertaken since December 2012 remains limited. There is an urgent need to
support – and intensify - such inter-religious dialogue both at the national and at the
community level.
Overall Assessment of the Situation
In my assessment, the widespread, unchecked nature of attacks by ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka
militia, as well as by armed civilians associated with them, against civilians on the basis of
religion or ethnicity constitute crimes against humanity. If not halted, there is a risk of
genocide in this country.
What can be Done?
The primary responsibility for the protection of its populations lies with the Central African
authorities. However, recognizing the fact that the transitional authorities have neither the
capacity to protect the civilian population nor to exercise control over the armed elements that
are attacking the civilian population, particularly women and children the international
community must take concrete measures to assist the State to stop the abuses and protect the
civilian population. There is urgent need to support the full and effective deployment of
MISCA. African countries should urgently contribute troops to this mission.
There should be concerted efforts to promote and support a national peace and reconciliation
process. There is urgent need to promote dialogue between Christians and Muslims to mitigate
the existing ethnical and religious divisions in the country. As a first step among a series of
initiatives in the country, my office is working to support the efforts of the President of the
Commission on Human Rights of the National Transitional Council and the National
-3-

Coordinator of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to organise
peace forums in the country that will bring together community and religious leaders from
seven provinces. But this is not enough, and I urge the international community to contribute to
this process.
It will be difficult to promote reconciliation and restore peace in the country without
addressing the current culture of impunity. The human rights violations and abuses that have
occurred have sowed seeds of hatred in communities. It is very important that we support all
initiatives, including the Commission of Inquiry, to identify perpetrators and hold those
responsible for violations and abuses accountable. We should also consider the establishment
of transitional justice mechanisms. There can be no excuses or justification for condoning
impunity.
Although the international community is responding late in the day, there is still a window to
act to mobilize appropriate resources and to reverse one of the worst human rights and
humanitarian crises of our time. We need to uphold our responsibility to protect Central
Africans from the risk of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity yesterday.
Thank you.
Adama Dieng
Under Secretary-General/Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
United Nations Headquarters
New York
Check against delivery

-4-

