Statement delivered by Japan – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Thank you very much, Mr. Moderator.
I’d like to thank the president of the General Assembly for convening this important meeting
and I’d also like to thank the moderator for the facilitation of this dialogue.
The government of Japan welcomes the report on R2P by the Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and we are very much encouraged to see the Secretary-General’s leadership on
R2P has been well handed over and look forward to seeing Secretary-General Guterres’
further leadership in promoting this important agenda.
Mr. Moderator, as the Secretary-General’s report correctly points out there is a gap
between concept and reality, while roles of states and international community for
protecting populations from atrocities are well acknowledged, many civilians on the ground
are still at risk or actually facing tragedies. There is a clear need to fill this gap.
The Security Council’s critical role for protection of people at risk of atrocities should be
stressed once again. In this connection, Japan continues to support the initiatives by France
and Mexico on the suspension of the veto in case of mass atrocities as well as the Code of
Conduct adopted by the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group (ACT). Japan
agrees with the Secretary-General’s report that prevention should be prioritized. In this
connection, I’d like to share with you today that the government of Japan, recognizing the
importance of preventive actions, has been offering assistance in the area of strengthening
governance, including the rule of law, in partnership with recipient governments, we have
been organizing various types seminars for legal experts and government officials, specially
in Asia. Japan also announced, on September last year, its contribution of about 10 million
US dollars to the UN Peacebuilding Fund in the coming years, with an aim of continuing to
contribute to the foundations for development to prevent conflicts, avoid their recurrence
and consolidate sustainable peace.
Mr. Moderator,
We all need to reaffirm our commitment to our own responsibility and redouble our efforts
to protect people from tragedies. Japan intends to further promote its support in areas that
I just mentioned with an expectation that the support will strengthen accountability
mechanisms and thus lead to the prevention of mass atrocities. At the same time, it goes
without saying that our collective efforts at the international community need to be
strengthened. In this connection, Japan supports the initiative led by Australia and Ghana to
include a General Assembly agenda item on R2P as well. I’d like to echo what the
distinguished permanent representative of Australia said that the time of GA debate is now.
In order to prevent further atrocities, let us all move from normative and political discussion
to the actual implementation.
Thank you very much Mr. Moderator. Thank you.

