Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the
Secretary-General
25 June 2019
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect1.
The Group of Friends of R2P thanks the High Commissioner for her update. Over the past
years, the Group of Friends of R2P has continuously emphasized the link between the
Responsibility to Protect and Geneva-based human rights mechanisms and institutions. As the
primary international human rights body, the Human Rights Council, through its procedures
and mechanisms, is particularly well suited to apply preventive measures in situations where
early warning signs of possible atrocities arise. Preventing widespread violations and abuses
of human rights is crucial to avoid them developing into mass atrocities. It is our individual
and collective responsibility to prevent that from happening. We further thank the High
Commissioner for highlighting the link between human rights violations and impunity.
In this regard, we would like to thank the High Commissioner and her office for their
preventive efforts in promoting human rights including through the World Programme of
Human Rights Education as well as in highlighting violations and abuses of human rights and
identifying patterns of systematic discrimination against individuals and groups. The
identification of risk factors and early warning signs is essential to prevent widespread
violations and abuses of human rights that could potentially lead to mass atrocities. We
therefore encourage the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to provide regular
information to the Human Rights Council and the UN General Assembly, and to provide
briefings to the UN Security Council, within her mandate. The promotion of a coherent and
comprehensive approach to mass atrocity prevention across the different UN-bodies is key in
upholding our responsibility to protect. We further encourage the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue and strengthen the engagement with the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect.
Besides regular HRC sessions, special procedures, treaty bodies and the Universal Periodic
Review are also key mechanisms for atrocity prevention and have often contributed to the early
warning of atrocity crimes. In addition, Human Rights Council-mandated investigative
mechanisms can play an instrumental role in documenting patterns of widespread human
rights violations, identify perpetrators of possible mass atrocity crimes, and strengthen
accountability processes. Together, this can have an important deterrence effect to prevent the
recurrence of atrocities.
In addition, the Human Rights Council and its procedures plays a crucial role in
strengthening states’ individual efforts to prevent mass atrocity crimes. By providing timely
and targeted technical assistance and capacity building measures, states are able to
strengthen respect for the rule of law and good governance and consolidate effective and
accountable national institutions, which are key elements for effective atrocity prevention.
Côte d’Ivoire, which has previously benefitted from technical assistance and capacity
building by an Independent Expert, serves as an example of how the HRC can contribute to
strengthening domestic institutions and national processes for structural prevention and
guarantees of non-recurrence.

In line with the recommendations from the latest SG report on the Responsibility to Protect,
we underscore the importance of enhancing prevention efforts at grassroots level, for which
assisting domestic, regional and local actors and institutions remains vital. Furthermore,
partnerships and cooperation between UN human rights mechanisms, within their mandates,
and national actors can ensure that atrocity prevention is both a bottom-up and top-down
process. All in all, the variety of human rights mechanisms and institutions allow for contextspecific and comprehensive preventive action.
However, where early warning signs and risk factors are being identified, timely and sustained
action should follow in accordance with the UN charter. The international community must
increase efforts when it comes to early action, as outlined in the Secretary General’s 2018 and
2019 reports on the Responsibility to Protect.
We strongly believe that this Council, and all UN Member States, can, and should do more to
make the responsibility to protect a living reality.
Thank you.

Netherlands, Rwanda, Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
South Sudan, Tanzania, Bangladesh, Japan, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Peru ,
Mexico, Panama, Uruguay, Belgium, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, European Union, Finland, France,
Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Norway, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada

