Statement delivered by Andorra – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Andorra shares the recommendations in the report of the Secretary-General upon the
implementation of the Responsibility to Protect. This year the report is devoted to accountability
for prevention which will allow us to effectively implement the role of states towards their
citizens and help to achieve the objectives of agenda 2030. We also appreciate that the line taken
by the Secretary-General involves many recommendations which have prevention as a basis. In
this way, we can adopt a very proactive position in the face of situations of serious breaches of
human rights. Responsibility to Protect must focus on prevention, as the Secretary-General
recommends in his report.
Andorra has worked on a standing invitation to the special procedures of the Human Rights
Council in November 2010 and we have ratified the main human rights instruments. Also in the
context of the sessions of the working group of the UPR, Andorra has taken into consideration
the state of ratification of the main international human rights instruments by the various states
and has published the corresponding recommendations urging states to consider its ratification.
It is important to highlight in this context, as the report does, that 71 member states are not yet
part of the Rome Statute. This is a necessary instrument for accountability and for combating
impunity for crimes against humanity. We would advocate for the Rome Statute becoming
universal and for strengthening the work of the International Criminal Court. Universalizing the
main instruments of human rights and cooperating effectively in states with independent
mechanisms are crucial for preventing conflicts in a multilateral context.
Andorra has supported initiatives towards restricting the use of the veto in the Security Council
in cases of severe violations of human rights and also the Code of Conduct. Finally, if you’ll allow
me Moderator, I should like to refer to Agenda 2030 as a framework for action in order to achieve
sustainable societies and more specifically with regard to education for global citizenship. This
can have a very important role for the effective implementation of the Responsibility to Protect,
promoting human rights, democratic values and a culture of peace. Promoting respect for
diversity can also be preventative measures for the Responsibility to Protect.
Andorra will continue to support the various initiatives towards accountability and good
governance for the effective implementation for the Responsibility to Protect.
Thank you.

