 STATEMENT

by
H. E. Michal Mlynar

Permanent Representative of the Slovak Republic
to the United Nations

Informal interactive dialogue on the report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility
to protect

6 September 2017
New York

-Check against delivery- Mr Chairman,

First, I express my sincere thanks to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and President of the
General Assembly Peter Thomson for their introductory words. I would also like to thank the
panellists for their inspirited remarks.

At the outset, Slovakia aligns itself with the statement presented by the distinguished
representative of the European Union, as well as with the statement made on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

Slovakia highly appreciates the ninth report prepared by the Secretary-General focusing on
the issue of implementation of the Responsibility to Protect. We share the view expressed in
the report that Responsibility to Protect is at the heart of the overall prevention agenda. We
must assume our accountability for prevention, so that the international community can meet
its collective duty to protect civilians from atrocity crimes.

Mr Chairman,

The three pillars of responsibility to protect are interconnected and mutually reinforcing.
Whereby it is the primary responsibility of the State to protect its own population from
atrocity crimes, the assistance provided by the international community - only and exclusively
with the consent of the host State and preferably upon its own request — can significantly
assist the efforts of individual States.

The report of the Secretary-General identifies practical steps on the national and international
level which can contribute to closing the gap — rightfully identified by the Secretary-General —
between our political, moral and legal obligations and commitments and their implementation.

Building national capacities such as strengthening good governance, the rule of law, and
creating effective judicial and security sectors is not only essential for fulfilling national
obligations to prevent mass atrocities, but also significantly contributes to a better a more
sustainable life of people. Let me point out that Slovakia has been a strong advocate of
Security Sector Reform which we consider to be a very important part of overall stabilization
and reconstruction in transitional societies, as well as a necessary condition for
democratization processes.

Further, without respect for human rights, we cannot assume our accountability for prevention
of atrocity crimes. In this respect, we welcome the recommendation to intensify the co-
operation with human rights monitoring mechanisms, including the better utilization of the
Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review process, which undoubtedly contribute to
the prevention and early warning of atrocity crimes.

When it comes to prevention, the role of the International Criminal Court is indispensable. It
serves not only as an independent and impartial judicial body prosecuting situations where
national jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to address the issue of accountability, but through
its authority has a preventive impact. In this regard, we call on all UN member states who
have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute and its amendments and thus help achieve its
full universality. To conclude, Mr Chairman,

Slovakia is firmly convinced that our efforts to achieve the full implementation of
Responsibility to Protect must progress to a higher level. We believe that the time has come to
introduce a specific item on atrocity crimes prevention and the implementation of the
responsibility to protect in the agenda of the General Assembly.

Thank you, Mr Chairman.