Statement delivered by Peru – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2016
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Mr. Moderator,
Peru is committed to consolidating the principle of the Responsibility to Protect. We consider this to be
inherent to promoting and protecting human rights. It is also closely linked to the obligations for human
rights assumed by the Peruvian government. We are committed to all three pillars of the Responsibility
to Correct and in recognizing that this principle is incumbent principally on states. The aim is not to
undermine but rather to reinforce sovereignty. It also means that when peaceful means are not adequate
and when the national authorities are not able to protect their people the member states can adopt
collective actions in a timely and decisive way in compliance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Moderator,
In this context Peru warmly welcomes the first report on the Responsibility to Protect drawn up by
Secretary-General Antonio Gutierrez which and he also makes this concept his own and how it could
become part of the agenda for prevention in his mandate. I’d like to stress the crucial role that could be
played by the state in strengthening accountability for the prevention of atrocity crimes. Prevention is
fundamental in order to achieve sustainable development and particularly sustainable development goal
16 on promotion of fair, peaceful and inclusive societies.
I should also like to briefly refer to a few activities that my country is carrying out in order to implement
this principle and its three pillars. In combatting impunity against grave violations of human rights in the
past between 2002 and 2016, 2012 and 2016, rather, the judicial authority has dealt with the cases of
hundreds of peoples who are victims of these crimes. Since 2005, implementation of the
recommendations of the report of the truth and reconciliation committee, Peru has an integral plan for
reparations, which has seven programs of reparations for civilian, military and police victims during the
periods of violence in past decades. Similarly, we’d like to stress that in 2012, Peru ratified the
international convention for the Protection of all Persons against Forced Disappearances. As part of the
implementation for this, in 2016, it recognized the competence of the committee against forced
disappearances and approved the laws to look for disappeared persons. In combatting impunity
externally, Peru is firmly committed to the work carried out by the International Criminal Court.
We would like to confirm our concern with the gap between the R2P principle and the day-to-day reality
for people exposed to atrocity crimes. Peru therefore agrees with the Secretary-General, in that in order
to close this gap we need to strengthen the various accountability mechanisms. This includes the
implementation of internal law and international law.
Finally, I should like to renew the thanks of the Peruvian delegation for the work carried out by the
Secretary-General, whose useful reports on a regular basis, help the member states in defining tangible
policies which focus on the need to protect. We therefore reiterate the need to include this topic on the
agenda of the General Assembly.
Thank you.

