Statement delivered by Iran – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Thank you, Mr. Moderator.
The concept of Responsibility to Protect could be considered as a noble and valuable initiative, if and when
it turns into a balanced, unbiased, and non-politicized principle applicable to all and guided generally by
human dignity, and not by politicized interests of states. However, in practice we are witnessing that double
standards and selective approaches are widespread due to the current status of affairs, which grants
impunity to favorable ones and overlooks the atrocities committed by them, no matter how serious and
grave they are. This is exactly where R2P could face a real challenge. Selectivity, double standards, and
politicization make it prone to manipulation and abuse. The political and legal gaps, and questions still remain
and should be solved before the application of R2P. For instance, why isn’t R2P being applied to the situation
of Palestine today? Why has it never been applied to this case so far? In fact, the international community
has failed to protect Palestinian people, which are facing war crimes, discrimination, and crimes against
humanity on a daily basis.
A clear example which demonstrates that R2P application has so far been guided by interests, rather than by
human dignity. Therefore, it is crucial that, prior to implementation of the concept of the Responsibility to
Protect, its normative content, as well as its scope of application be defined in objective, impartial and nonpoliticized manner, fully in line with the 2005 World Summit outcome document. Therefore, it is still
premature to include this item in the formal agenda of the General Assembly. Before the prevention of the
conflicts should be at the heart of the R2P concept. The war of aggression is illegal and military intervention
without authorization of the Security Council must be prohibited and its perpetrators shall be held
accountable. It is obvious that any abuse of R2P to make unilateral military intervention is a flagrant violation
of international law, and in particular would be in contradiction to Article 2 Paragraph 4 of the UN Charter.
Finally, in limited cases and as a last resort, request of measures is needed to save population R2P fall within
the collective security framework of the UN and shall be authorized by Security Council in full compliance of
international law. The organization of the Security Council should not be understood as a camouflage for
committing of atrocities. It should be clear and objective and expected the duration of the intervention and
monetary process. The Security Council should continue to monitor the operation on the ground. It is also
the responsibility of the international community to assist in reconstruction process in the post intervention
era. Therefore, while we should carefully [remember] the responsibility while protecting, we should not
forget the responsibility after protection to avoid the recurrence of future atrocities.
Thank you, Mr. Moderator.

