
It is with great
pleasure that I am addressing the General Assembly on
behalf of Portugal on this topic of concern to all of us.
We are fully aligned with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union (see A/72/
PV.99), and I would like to add additional remarks in
my national capacity.
Let me first thank the Secretary-General for his
report (А/72/884), on the follow-up to the outcome
of the 2005 World Summit. Portugal fully shares
his views. In today’s world we must be aware of
our collective responsibility to protect vulnerable

populations should States fail to protect their citizens
from the worst atrocities.
Portugal fully endorses the common pledge to
promote and strengthen the principle of the responsibility
to protect on the basis of a threefold strategy — first,
strengthening existing capacities; secondly, promoting
accountability; and lastly, innovating for prevention
through civil society. We urge all States to support the
inclusion of the responsibility to protect as a standing
item on the agenda of the General Assembly, and we
commend Australia and Ghana for their leadership,
as well as the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.
We call on the Security Council to further expand its
early-warning tools and reinforce the peaceful settlement
of disputes. We would like to point to our support to
the French-Mexican initiative on the suspension of the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocity, as well as the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group with regard to timely and decisive
action by the Security Council against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes.
We have an obligation to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity on the basis of international
human rights standards. Portugal therefore recognizes
the pivotal role of the Human Rights Council in
proactively implementing early-warning and earlyaction mechanisms to prevent violent conflicts and
mass atrocity crimes. We also want to reiterate our
continued support and recognition of the work of the
United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and
Responsibility to Protect and to thank the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, and the former Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, for their guidance. We commend both
Mexico and Finland for co-hosting the eighth meeting
of the Global Network of R2P Focal Points.
Portugal reaffirms its full commitment to
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and special political
missions in order to prevent outbreaks and relapses into
conflict. We participate in numerous United Nations
missions, deploying more than 200 members our of
military and security forces. We also endorse the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, which guide
our forces in field operations.

In conclusion, it is our collective obligation to be
fully united on the responsibility to protect. While
the primary responsibility lies with each and every
country, Portugal believes that the United Nations
is the central platform for pursuing the debate and
looking for action-driven solutions, when needed, in
full coordination with the States concerned.