
Today we are witnessing record-breaking levels of
human displacement, with unprecedented numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons, more than
68 million people, forced to flee their homes. The fully
man-made humanitarian and human rights crises such
as those in Syria, Burma, and South Sudan, which are
driving that mass displacement, highlight the urgent
need for all Member States to adhere to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and for a coordinated and speedy international response
to mass atrocities.
The United States remains deeply committed
to preventing, mitigating and responding to atrocity
crimes, and we urge the international community
to do more to act in concert and respond before they
occur. We are pleased to be here today to reaffirm our
support for the responsibility to protect civilians from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity and to make a particular plea for more
timely and decisive action in the Security Council on
current and future humanitarian crises.
We are currently seeing a tremendous human toll
resulting from unchecked atrocities across the globe.
Regarding South Sudan, the Council has been paralysed
since it passed resolution 2206 (2015). Meanwhile,
more than 2 million people have fled the fighting in
the last two years. The United Nations has observed
and reported on the widespread commission of mass
atrocities and gross human rights violations in South
Sudan. We have recently renewed the Council sanctions
established under resolution 2206 (2015), but we must
do more. The United States has repeatedly called on the
Council and the United Nations to support sanctions

on those accountable for these atrocities and for a
comprehensive arms embargo. Our commitment to the
responsibility to protect should result in real action to
address modern-day atrocities, such as those in South
Sudan, yet we have too often fallen short or failed to act
when we can could or should.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
early warning and early action (A/72/884), including
the assertion that effective atrocity prevention means
helping countries to avert the outbreak of atrocity
crimes. The United States believes that more should be
done to improve our responses to early warning signals,
including overcoming the uncertainties, hesitancy and
lack of political will that impede early action. It is
worth the investment to prevent the high human cost of
those crimes.
In fact, we all know that the costs of prevention — in
the form of improving human rights institutions, the
fair administration of justice and equitable, accountable
governance — pale in comparison to the political,
financial and military costs typically required to
respond to a crisis. We applaud the Secretary-General’s
efforts to empower and coordinate a broader set of
actors, including civil society, parliaments, national
human rights institutions, regional organizations and
the entire United Nations system.
Further strengthening the principle of the
responsibility to protect and building knowledge of
the range of preventive action can also help turn early
warning into early action. To that end, the United States
supports scheduling regular, open debates in the Security
Council, including on emerging threats and human
rights issues that threaten to escalate into atrocities,
and we support including the responsibility to protect
as a standing item on the General Assembly agenda.
We also commend the Secretary-General’s
initiative on gathering and sharing lessons learned on
effective early warning and early action. We strongly
encourage him to appoint the next Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect as soon as possible in order
to advance international commitments and tools for
effective atrocity prevention within the United Nations
framework. The United States encourages Member
States to follow the Secretary-General’s call to create
a national focal point for the responsibility to protect,
conduct assessments consistent with the United Nations
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes and take

early action on the findings. It is vital that those focal
points do more than simply carry a title.
The United States continues to strengthen its
preventive capacities through the Atrocities Prevention
Board, which coordinates a whole-of-Government
approach to bolstering our ability to forecast, prevent
and respond to mass atrocities. The Board oversees
global risk analysis, followed by deeper analysis of
prioritized countries, identifying potential pathways to
atrocities and opportunities to prevent or mitigate them,
including by expanding existing resiliencies. The Board
has coordinated a range of actions, such as targeted
sanctions, preventive diplomacy and programming,
mediation, improving adherence to the rule of law,
documenting atrocities, supporting peacekeepers and
evacuating populations under attack.
While the United States recognizes the sovereignty
of all Member States, we want to remind them of the
commitments they voluntarily entered into to protect
their populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. We
continue to work with partner countries to strengthen
coordination and share best practices, including through
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect. We
also recognize the critical role of non-governmental
organizations, the media, business and religious
leaders, and local populations, including women, in
efforts to prevent and respond to mass atrocities. The
United States actively engages with those civic actors
and organizations to enhance early-warning and earlyaction efforts, and to reflect on lessons learned.
When prevention fails, promoting accountability
for mass atrocity crimes is a priority for the United
States. Bringing perpetrators to justice can deter
those who might otherwise be emboldened to follow
in their footsteps and can help advance post-conflict
reconciliation. The United States Government is
committed to holding those responsible for atrocities
accountable by appropriately bringing them to justice
in independent and impartial processes in accordance
with fair-trial guarantees. We also recognize the
importance of programmes to support survivors and
promote reconciliation in the aftermath of atrocities, as
a history of atrocities is one of the strongest predictors
of similar future events.
The United States Government supports the
Secretary-General’s efforts to better coordinate the

United Nations system in order to prevent atrocities.
In particular, we strongly support his recommendation
that the Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict work more closely with the Joint Office
of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, and we commend
the excellent work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, particularly in the Burma context.
Women are often uniquely positioned within their
communities to identify social behaviours and patterns
that are warning signs of violence against civilians. The
United States strongly supports efforts to promote the
meaningful participation of women in the prediction
and prevention of outbreaks of mass atrocities. To that
end, President Trump signed the Women, Peace and
Security Act of 2017, making the United States the first
country to enact legislation incorporating resolution
1325 (2000) into national law.
States that disregard or violate their primary
responsibility to protect their own citizens represent
one of the greatest threats to international peace and
security we face today. Those who attempt to shield
their crimes behind a veil of national sovereignty
should find no comfort in this Hall. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, written in the aftermath
of war and horrors, states in its Preamble that
“disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted
in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience
of mankind” — a statement that is sadly no less true
today than it was 70 years ago, when that foundational
document was created.
We have yet to achieve the highest aspirations
laid out in the Universal Declaration, but in fully
implementing the responsibility to protect, we can
remain true to those aspirations and to our national and
collective commitments to them.