
I would like to align
myself with the statements made earlier by the observer
of the European Union and by the representative of Qatar
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility
to Protect.

We welcome the inclusion of the responsibility to
protect as a formal agenda item of the General Assembly
for the first time since 2009, 10 years ago. I was at that
event, and I think it astonishing that we have waited 10
years before once again addressing the responsibility to
protect in the General Assembly. I support the calls of
colleagues for it to become a standing item.
My Government, the United Kingdom, remains
fully committed to the responsibility to protect. The
principle is outlined in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the
2005 World Summit Outcome document (resolution
60/1), which has been endorsed by all Member States.
The Secretary-General was spot on to talk about
dispelling mistrust, although at times I have the feeling
that some of that mistrust is vexatious rather than
genuine. At the same time, we acknowledge the concern
that the principle of the responsibility to protect is
sometimes used with double motives. We must fully
address that concern.
Despite the widespread endorsement of the
concept, it is disturbing to hear United Nations reports
that armed conflict and persecution have led to more
than 65 million people being forcibly displaced, more
than 22 million becoming internally displaced refugees
and 10 million people becoming stateless. If I may, I
would like to address in turn the three pillars of the
responsibility to protect.
Under the first pillar, States should uphold
their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian rights and refugee law. National
ownership is important, but it needs to be just that. It is
not a national license to mistreat one’s own population,
and there are too many examples of States that fail
the first pillar of the responsibility to protect because
they are either unwilling or unable to bear their own
responsibility to protect.
There is a fundamental tension here. The more that
Member States do not want to hold a spotlight up to
what is happening with the persecution of minorities
and other communities in a particular State, the more
likely it is that that persecution will eventually lead
to a bigger crisis affecting neighbouring States and
therefore come to the wider attention of the international
community, including the Security Council, and
increase the prospect of international engagement or,
ultimately, possibly even some form of intervention.
That intervention does not have to be military, but we
all know that sanctions remain a tool on the Council’s

agenda. So I reiterate that there is a fundamental
tension, and I think we do not give that tension enough
of our own attention in this Hall.
Under the second pillar, early warning and conflict
prevention, we support the Secretary-General’s reforms
and the linkages he draws in his report between
preventive capacities, especially those of Member
States, and the responsibility to protect. We welcome
his assessment that there should be a more systematic
and structured approach across the United Nations,
including in New York, Geneva and the field offices,
to information gathering, the assessment of atrocity
risk and collective analysis, so that Member States
can receive earlier recommendations for action and
prevention and can draw collective attention to them,
as necessary.
The United Nations Joint Office of the Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect has an essential role in helping
mainstream the responsibility to protect, both within
the United Nations and on an international level, and
the United Nations Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect have
important roles to play in bringing potential atrocity
risks to the attention of the Council. We therefore hope
that the position of Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect will be filled soon.
I would like to say a word about sustaining peace.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s vision for
sustaining peace, which rightly focuses on conflict
prevention, greater coordination across the United
Nations system and peacebuilding. Four areas of the
United Kingdom’s own focus within the sustaining
peace agenda are diversification of the approaches of
the United Nations so that it has a greater range of tools
to deploy, development to address conflict drivers,
diplomacy to de-escalate crises and create a longerterm peace, and delivery so that things can be efficient
and inclusive and can leverage partnerships.
With regard to mediation, the Secretary-General
is to be congratulated on the progress that the United
Nations has made in addressing the greater need for
mediation across the system. We all know that active
preventive diplomacy and mediation can help to prevent
atrocities, but here I come back to the tension that I
highlighted earlier. The United Kingdom has been a
staunch supporter of a strengthened and more agile
United Nations mediation capacity. We applaud the

work of the Mediation Support Unit and the Department
of Political Affairs in this critical area. Mediation has
made an important contribution to preventing and
reducing conflict around the world, and we welcome
the establishment in 2017 of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation.
I want to make a special reference to women.
They hold a key role in mediation, and we hope that
the United Nations can increase the number of female
special envoys nominated by the Secretary-General
and the number of women nominated for the Mediation
Standby Unit, to join the women who have been chosen.
Turning to the third pillar of the responsibility to
protect, “never again” has to really mean something.
Expelling populations and loading communities onto
trains all have a very special resonance for the United
Nations and its Member States. If countries do not
want international engagement, they must look after
their own populations to the standards that the United
Nations expects. We support the need for effective
accountability for atrocity crimes, which can help
deter recurrence. States have the primary responsibility
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdiction, while international courts and hybrid
tribunals can play an important role when States are
unwilling or genuinely unable to act.
The United Kingdom is pleased to provide
financial, logistical and political support to a broad
range of judicial and investigatory mechanisms, and
we urge others to contribute to those accountability
efforts. In particular, we encourage all States to support
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2379
(2017), which sets up an investigative team to assist
efforts to hold Da’esh accountable for crimes committed
in Iraq.
In closing, I would like to echo the words of the
Permanent Representative of Kiribati, who stated that
no one country can do this alone. The United Kingdom
stands ready to play its part, along with our international
friends and colleagues.