UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Joint Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, and Karen Smith, United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility to
Protect, on attacks against religious minorities in Sri Lanka
(New York, 13 May 2019) Recalling their recent statements against violent extremism and hate
speech, the United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and
the United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Karen Smith are alarmed
about the growing acts of violence on the basis of religion, including attacks against homes,
places of worship and businesses, in the North Western Province of Sri Lanka.
The Special Advisers noted a recent spate of attacks against Muslim and Christian communities
in Sri Lanka, a majority Buddhist country. The attacks committed on this weekend of 11 May
follow deadly attacks carried out on Easter Sunday of 21 April 2019, against churches and hotels
in various parts of the country in which more than 200 people were killed and hundreds were
injured. The recent violence in Sri Lanka has highlighted a growing influence of nationalist and
extremist views of identity in the Asia region, putting religious minorities at risk.
The Special Advisers stated that “it is in the interest of all ethnic and religious groups in Sri
Lanka, as well as the Government, the opposition, civil society and the security sector, to work
collaboratively in taking appropriate action and immediately stop these hateful attacks. The
country is trying to move forward from a traumatic period of inter-ethnic armed conflict, but
these attacks are pushing Sri Lanka backwards. If not adequately dealt with, the recent violence
has the potential to escalate even further.”
The Special Advisers acknowledged and welcomed the swift response of the Government,
including by deploying the security forces to protect affected communities and addressing the
spread of false information and incitement to violence. They also encouraged the Government to
make sure that these and other past similar attacks are fully investigated and those responsible
for instigating or committing these violent acts are brought to justice and made accountable.
They added that “the Government needs to give the example that it will not tolerate the spread of
prejudice and hate among groups within its population. This needs to be done at national and
local level, by putting an end to local discriminatory practices that perpetuate religious
intolerance and violence”. Mr. Dieng and Ms. Smith also offered their support to work with the
Government on inter-faith and inter-religious harmony and inclusivity.
The Special Advisers concluded by stating that “Sri Lanka has a pluralistic society. To be a Sri
Lankan is to be a Buddhist, to be Hindu, to be a Muslim, to be a Christian. All these
communities are entitled to their identity, to freely exercise their religion and to live in peace and
security in Sri Lanka, as recognized by the country’s Constitution. We call on all Sri Lankans to
respect one another.”

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
Email: osapg@un.org
http://www.un.org/genocideprevention

