
My delegation is taking the
floor to deliver an explanation of vote after the voting.
Pakistan engaged constructively in the drafting of
resolution 73/304, which was presented by Romania.
Pakistan is firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Torture is an abhorrent practice that violates human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Pakistan, as party
to the Convention against Torture, is firmly committed
to the implementation of all its provisions. Pakistan’s
commitment to prohibiting torture is also guaranteed
under article 42 of Pakistan’s Constitution.
Promoting human rights and preventing torture
is an important component of the global human rights
regime. Resolution 73/304, unfortunately, is not
consistent with the highest international standards that
the international human rights regime has established. It
falls woefully short of requisite human rights standards.
A resolution of the General Assembly on
establishing common international standards on such

a topic requires due deliberation and due process.
Regrettably, neither were deliberations held in a timely,
substantive and transparent manner, nor did the process
of finalizing the resolution take on board concerns
expressed by an array of cross-regional Member
States during consultations. We regret that none of
our concerns and proposals or those of many other
delegations, which we supported, were taken on board
by the facilitators.
The association between trade and human rights is
not a new concept, but it does not command consensus
among Member States. Also, establishing common
international standards for the trade of equipment has
no linkage with preventing torture. That idea lacks
empirical evidence. Using trade agreements to impose
specific values and norms is not the right way to address
human rights issues. On the contrary, theory and the
available evidence suggest that the growth of the free
trade system promotes human rights.
Finally, Pakistan rejects the attempt, through
the resolution, to create a linkage between the death
penalty and torture. The death penalty is ordered as a
result of due process of the law under national criminal
justice systems for the most serious crimes. It is
acceptable under the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. Article 6 of the Covenant clearly
states that a sentence of death may be imposed for only
the most serious crimes in accordance with the law in
force at the time of the commission of the crime and
not contrary to the provisions of the present Covenant.
Furthermore, every country has the sovereign right
under international law to decide its own criminal
justice system based on its international circumstances.
For the reasons I mentioned, Pakistan was unable to
join the consensus on the resolution and voted against
it. Pakistan also disassociates itself from the resolution
and requests the General Assembly to reflect that in
its record.