
Allow me to start
by reiterating Germany’s full commitment to the
responsibility to protect (R2P) and underlining
the importance of including it in the agenda of the
General Assembly.
For us, R2P is in our DNA, and we always carry
it with us — whether it be in the deliberations in the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council or the
Security Council. In fact, Germany ran for a Security
Council seat on a prevention platform to do more for
conflict prevention and, importantly, to do more for
human rights and international accountability for mass
atrocities. We fully believe in “never again”, and are
constantly engaging in efforts to foster a culture of
historical consciousness in Germany itself, an important
part of guaranteeing non-recurrence. Therefore, for us,
it is of the utmost importance that the responsibility

to protect be about preventing and national capacitybuilding. In particular, Germany wants to strengthen
the preventive aspect of the concept and pillar II
through operational work.
I thank the Chef de Cabinet for her statement this
morning (see A/73/PV.93). We hope that the SecretaryGeneral will be able to join us again for this important
debate next year. I also thank Special Adviser Karen
Smith for her first report, especially for its emphasis on
civil society and its mention of civil society as a source
of resilience. Of course, Germany fully supports the
crucial work of the Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect and
works closely together with them.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/73/PV.93). I
would like to underline four points specifically.
First, it is important that the Security Council
consider mass atrocity crimes and the responsibility
to protect in its work. During the German-French
presidency of the Council in March and April, we focused
on the implementation of humanitarian law, which is
a crucial element in ensuring that the responsibility
to protect works. For example, our Foreign Minister
presided over a debate on sexual violence in conflict (see
S/PV.8514), which in some cases may amount of crimes
against humanity, war crimes or acts of genocide. In
the same vein, our Minister of Justice led an informal
meeting of the Security Council on the prosecution of
sexual violence in conflict.
Encouraging links between the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council is another example.
We need regular briefings in the Security Council by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. In that regard, we have been impressed
by the input that we have received on Haiti and on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
We will also be launching a humanitarian call for
action, together with France, during the high-level
week in September. We call for the continuation of this
practice. Germany will certainly continue to play its
part in mainstreaming human rights into all United
Nations bodies.
Secondly, Germany is dedicated to strengthening
a rules-based international order, which is effective

only if there is accountability. We therefore strongly
support the international criminal justice system, and
in particular the International Criminal Court, as a
means of providing accountability for perpetrators, but
also as a powerful means of deterrence. That is why
Germany is also supportive of the ongoing deliberations
of the International Law Commission on articles on
crimes against humanity with a view to promulgating a
draft convention.
We also back other accountability bodies, such as the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 and the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar that
was just established. We all for the latter to become
operational as soon as possible.
Myanmar brings me to my third point — the role of
the United Nations system in preventing mass atrocities.
We welcome the release of the Rosenthal report, and
call on the Secretary-General to take its conclusions
too heart. At the same time, we are encouraged that the
United Nations conducted a transparent review of its
actions. While the Secretariat needs to rightly look to
its intergovernmental bodies to guide it in its actions,
the United Nations also needs to be fit for purpose
when it comes to mass atrocity prevention. We hope
that reform of the Resident Coordinator system will
be fruitful in that regard. We would be interested to
hear in the near future how Resident Coordinators are
prioritizing human rights and mass atrocity prevention
in their work. And, of course, the Secretary-General can
always bring situations of concern of the Secretariat to
the attention of the Security Council under Article 99
of the Charter.
Finally, and as a fourth point, Germany strengthens
pillar II of R2P internally as well as in its foreign
policy. For example, the Foreign Office is including
crisis prevention as a concrete aim that needs to be
reached in its general instructions to the heads of our
own missions abroad. Furthermore, within the German
so-called early warning-early action process, we are
developing technological capabilities to monitor crisis
and atrocity risk factors in specific countries. Lastly,
we also provide funding to civil society organizations
to increase local capacities in mass atrocity prevention.
For example, just this month we issued funding to the

Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation to
work on capacity-building in Latin America.