
(spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is taking the floor in explanation of vote
before the voting on draft resolution A/73/L.94,
entitled “Towards torture-free trade: examining the
feasibility, scope and parameters for possible common
international standards”, under agenda item 74,
“Promotion and protection of human rights”, which is
currently being examined.

First, it must be clarified that the Sudan is against
torture and the inhuman or degrading treatment and
punishment of persons. Nevertheless, linking human
rights issues with international trade issues, especially
torture, still does not enjoy consensus among Member
States. More discussions and study are needed to reach
consensus within the General Assembly. My country’s
delegation therefore believes that the draft resolution
should be further discussed in the Committees of
the General Assembly, which will lead to the desired
consensus and neutral international standards.
Secondly, in several of its paragraphs the draft
resolution addresses capital punishment, which is a
controversial issue that does not yet enjoy consensus
within the Committees of the General Assembly.
This issue contradicts national legislation in many
countries, as well as their cultural and ideological
background. Setting punishments in accordance with
national legislation and laws is a sovereign issue in the
first place, and does not contravene international laws
and treaties. Member States must respect that. In this
regard, my country’s delegation rejects the reference
to capital punishment in the preambular and operative
paragraphs of the draft resolution. In addition, the third
preambular paragraph does not clearly state which
instruments are likely to be used for torture or for
causing harm, which makes exporting, importing and
producing them a difficult and controversial issue.
For all these reasons, my country’s delegation
shares the concerns and reservations of other
delegations and will vote against the draft resolution.
We also request that this statement be included in the
record of this meeting.