
(spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility
to Protect, and welcomes the fact that for the first time
since 2009, the General Assembly has included this
item on its agenda. We are grateful for the efforts made
by Ghana and Australia to hold this discussion.
My country would like to take this opportunity
to renew its legal, moral and political commitment to
achieving the full implementation of this principle,
recognized in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome document (resolution 60/1),
and its three pillars. We call on the membership to keep
it on the formal agenda of the General Assembly. We
are grateful for the report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/884), which reaffirms the relevance and validity
of the principle and presents us with the challenges of a
much more complex international reality.
Today State and non-State actors are threatening
civilian populations and showing a total lack of respect
for human life and dignity. Every day millions of
people flee the violence and humiliation to which they

are subjected, while thousands of others are killed
with impunity. The principle of the responsibility
to protect is very closely related to the obligation of
States, expressed in many norms of international
law, international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, to refrain from systemic violations
of the human rights of civilian populations.
However, the international community has been
reluctant in protecting civilians. Thanks to political
divides and geopolitical interests, the principal organs
of the United Nations have failed to take the necessary
effective action to prevent or stop attacks on civilians.
That is why today we strongly urge the members of
the Security Council, whether permanent or elected,
to honour the Charter of the United Nations and fulfil
their mandate to ensure prompt and effective action
in upholding the Council’s primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We also
urge the permanent members to refrain from using
the veto in situations of genocide, atrocity crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Collective international action to prevent mass
atrocities must be based on impartial information
gathered in a manner not affected by political
pressures. For that reason, Costa Rica supports
initiatives such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative, and we call on the
membership to support the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group’s code of conduct on genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In addition, we invite the Assembly to take on
the recommendations of the Secretary-General on
strengthening internal mechanisms for the early
warning and prevention of atrocities by implementing
efficient communication and collaboration mechanisms
at the national level, and through greater and better
coordination at the international level among the
principal organs of the United Nations and the
mechanisms established by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s view that
early warning is the essence of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, taking into account prevention
in all spheres of public life. We call for incorporating

into domestic legal systems the international norms of
human rights and international humanitarian law and
for ensuring accountability at all levels of authority,
both civil and military. Furthermore, we call for the
appointment of focal points to participate in the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points.
In order to prevent the recurrence of atrocities, it
is imperative to address processes for post-conflict
national reconciliation through transitional justice, the
preservation of memory and the reconstruction of social
peace. For that, it is necessary to end impunity and
bring those responsible to justice, and to refrain from
granting immunity and amnesty to the perpetrators. We
invite those who have not yet done so to sign the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court and all its
amendments. We call on all of us that are States parties
to the Statute to carry out the decisions in line with our
international obligations.