
Croatia aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union
and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
I will add several points in my national capacity.
The responsibility to protect (R2P) remains
one of the most suitable principles around which the
international community can rally when populations
at risk face the threat of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. States have
undertaken a number of measures to date to strengthen
their resilience to atrocity crimes. At the national level,
more than 60 States and two regional organizations
have appointed focal points and reviewed or adopted
mechanisms to strengthen resilience to atrocity crimes,
and are continuing to explore and establish national
arrangements to prevent serious crimes. Croatia is
proud to be among them.
Croatia encourages regional organizations to take
a more active role in promoting and implementing this
concept. We stand ready to engage strategically with all
stakeholders in order to promote general awareness of
R2P through public awareness campaigns and sharing
national best practices in this regard.

We welcome this year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/73/898), focused on lessons learned for
prevention. All around the world we are witnessing a
dangerous increase of hate language used by radicalized
groups, or even political leaders, which can easily
slide into incitement to hate crimes, as we have seen
in recent attacks against religious and minority groups
particularly exposed to these challenges. It is high time
that we finally draw lessons from this and recognize
and expose such dangerous narratives appropriately
and on time.
Croatia pays particular attention to conflict
prevention, the rule of law and the promotion of
democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms,
while recognizing that such efforts are an investment
in addressing root causes of conflict and fostering
prevention. Prevention and national accountability for
protection are cornerstones in reducing atrocity crimes.
Putting our national commitments to this concept
into practice, Croatia has positioned its national
accountability for prevention and resilience at the top
of its priorities.
It has become increasingly difficult to reach
consensus in the Security Council when it comes to
issues concerning the protection of human rights.
Therefore, we call for better utilization of the Council’s
working methods to take potential mass atrocity
situations into consideration as early as possible.
We support open debates on R2P and attach great
importance to briefings from the Secretary-General’s
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect regarding early warning
on situations where populations are at risk.

new Special Adviser on R2P. We are confident that her
knowledge and experience will contribute to the further
advancement of the implementation of R2P within the
United Nations system.
We are especially concerned over the worrisome
trend of forced displacement being used as a military
tactic, as well as sexual and gender-based violence
being increasingly employed as a strategy by State
and non-State perpetrators. When committed in a
widespread or systematic manner, such acts may
amount to crimes against humanity, war crimes or acts
of genocide. That applies in particular to disastrous
events, at great expense of minority populations, who
are always among the most vulnerable.
Croatia reiterates the need for all Member States
to uphold their obligations under international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and
international refugee law, as a foundation of upholding
the principle of R2P. Last year, we marked the seventieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. We urge
Member States that have not yet ratified or acceded to
the Convention to do so as a matter of priority.
Finally, we cannot stress enough the importance
of States upholding their primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdictions. Croatia voices its support for the
International Criminal Court, which remains the most
important institutional development in the battle to
end impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

As a current member of the Human Rights
Council, Croatia encourages further strengthening
of links between the Human Rights Council and the
Security Council for early warning and early action.
Geneva-based institutions and mechanisms, such as
the Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
mandate holders, as well as appointed fact-finding
missions and commissions of inquiry, play a unique
role in preventing mass atrocity crimes.