
At the outset, I would
like to align myself with the statements made earlier
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
Denmark welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884).
For us, the responsibility to protect is a key principle,
building on existing international law, and we reaffirm
our commitment to the World Summit Outcome

document (resolution 60/1). The responsibility to protect
is a call for preventive action, and its three pillars are
of equal importance. The responsibility to protect is,
first and foremost, about the State protecting its entire
population against atrocity crimes.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the implementation of our responsibility
to protect is an important part of the wider prevention
agenda, which also includes the very vital Human
Rights Up Front initiative. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s pledges to bring atrocity risks to
the attention of all relevant United Nations organs and
to encourage a more integrated approach to atrocity
prevention within the United Nations. We offer our full
support to the Secretary-General in that regard, and we
urge the swift appointment of a new Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect. As we know, the Special
Adviser plays a key role in assisting Member States
in their work on implementing atrocity prevention,
and we would like to underscore that a new adviser
should ideally have practical experience with atrocity
prevention in a Member State context.
Denmark welcomes today’s opportunity to discuss
the implementation of our commitment to protect our
populations from atrocity crimes. This formal debate
allows us to exchange views, raise issues and highlight
good practices. That is fully in line with the 2005
World Summit Outcome document, which stressed
the importance of ensuring that the General Assembly
continues to consider the responsibility to protect. We
therefore support the call of the Secretary-General and
many other Member States today to make it a standing
item in the Assembly.
The responsibility to protect is primarily a
Member State commitment and this meeting should
therefore include reporting by Member States. How
do we all honour the solemn promise of “never again”,
as enshrined in the principle of the responsibility to
protect and the Genocide Convention? I would like
to report on some of the initiatives that Denmark has
recently undertaken to implement our commitment to
the responsibility to protect.
The preventive and universal nature of the
responsibility to protect makes it necessary for all of us
to apply it in a domestic context. With regard to the first
pillar, the Danish Government has initiated discussions
with our national human rights institution on how to
integrate the responsibility to protect into our national

human rights reporting. We also recently co-organized
the third global meeting of Global Action Against Mass
Atrocity Crimes. The meeting was generously hosted
by the Government of Uganda and convened more
than 40 Governments and regional and international
organizations, as well as a large number of civilsociety organizations. The focus of the meeting was
the strengthening of national architectures to prevent
atrocity crimes.
With regard to the second pillar, earlier this year
Denmark published an independent research report
on how to implement the responsibility to protect in
Danish foreign policy, focusing on human rights and
development cooperation. The report highlights a
number of concrete areas where we can do better in
order to prevent atrocity crimes and assist Member
States in preventing them. We are now working on
implementing key recommendations from the report,
and we would be happy to share its findings with other
Member States.
The Danish Government has also continued its
collaboration with other Governments in exercising their
responsibility to protect. We remain strongly committed
to fighting impunity for atrocity crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and others in
Iraq and Syria. We actively support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, as well as civil society organizations engaged in
the collection of evidence to prosecute atrocity crimes.
Through our Special Representative for Freedom of
Religion or Belief, Denmark is also engaged in the
implementation of the Plan of Action for Religious
Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement to Violence
that Could Lead to Atrocity Crimes.
With regard to the third pillar, Denmark continues
to support the unanimous commitment made by
Member States in the World Summit Outcome
document. If Governments are manifestly unwilling
to protect their populations against atrocity crimes,
we share a responsibility to take collective action in a
timely and decisive manner. That means, for example,
the Security Council’s referral of relevant situations
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). Breaking
the cycle of impunity can be an important factor
in stopping ongoing and preventing future atrocity
crimes. The ICC can be a key asset when it comes to

implementing our responsibility to protect. Denmark
therefore supports referring the situation in Syria to the
ICC and considering the same step for other situations
where atrocity crimes are met with impunity.
All our efforts are linked to our national focal point
on the responsibility to protect. In our experience,
a national focal point is a key facilitator in engaging
different Government agencies in atrocity prevention,
as well as other stakeholders. Denmark is a proud
co-founder of the Global Network of R2P Focal Points,
as has been mentioned by others today. It is a vital forum
for States to collaborate on the implementation of the
responsibility to protect, and we encourage all Member
States to join the 60 Governments in the Network.
In conclusion, Denmark welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on the responsibility to protect.
Denmark fully supports the Secretary-General’s call
for redoubling our efforts, and we look forward to
continuing our close cooperation with the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect.
We are currently witnessing a number of situations in
which populations are enduring unimaginable atrocity
crimes. That shows that we all have to invest much more
to realize our responsibility to protect. It is our hope that
this debate and subsequent actions by Member States,
international organizations and civil society will help
to improve our record.