
First, I would like to
express our sincere appreciation to the President for
presiding over this important meeting, and to him and
to the Secretary-General for their introductory words,
as well as for the convening of the meeting.
At the outset, Slovakia aligns itself with the
statements delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union and by the representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility to
Protect, of which Slovakia is also a proud member.
Last year, Slovakia firmly supported the inclusion
of item 132, “Responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity”, on the Assembly’s
agenda at its seventy-second session. A formal debate,
the first since 2009, is clearly the appropriate forum for
discussions on the responsibility to protect. We hope
that today’s debate will not remain an exception in the
row of informal interactive dialogues, and we therefore
support the inclusion of the responsibility to protect as
a standing item on the Assembly’s agenda.
Slovakia greatly appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on the responsibility to protect
(A/72/884). We fully subscribe to the view that the
responsibility to protect forms an integral part of the
broader prevention agenda. On one hand, focusing on
the issue of implementing the responsibility to protect
can show the practical gains flowing from that concept
in specific situations. On the other hand, it is potentially

easier to reassure doubts about the concept in that way
than by having a general theoretical discussion.

2011 and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

The three pillars of the responsibility to protect
are interconnected and mutually reinforcing. No
one questions the primary responsibility of the State
to protect its own population from atrocity crimes.
However, assistance provided by the international
community — with the consent of the host State, and
preferably at its own request — can significantly aid the
efforts of individual Member States.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that we are
firmly convinced of the value of the full implementation
of the concept of the responsibility to protect. Only
sincere and effective action can safeguard the humanity
and dignity of the people of our planet for the future.

Building national capacities and resilient institutions
is not only essential for fulfilling national obligations to
prevent mass atrocities but also significantly contributes
to a better and more sustainable life for people. Good
governance, the rule of law and effective judicial and
security institutions are indispensable for thriving
societies that respect and guarantee the human rights
and freedoms of all individuals.
Slovakia has been actively engaged in many efforts
related to this particular agenda. As co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, we consider
that agenda to be closely linked to the responsibility to
protect, and the nexus is a very important component of
our wider efforts to build successful and just societies.
Security institutions are most likely to interfere with
the people’s rights. High-quality training, a strictly
rule-of-law-based approach and effective oversight
are indispensable for their correct performance of
their duties. Security-sector reform is also essential to
overall stabilization and reconstruction, especially in
transitional societies.
In spite of the efforts of the international community,
atrocity crimes, sadly enough, are still being committed.
That is the point where accountability mechanisms
become even more visible and essential. In that respect,
the role of the International Criminal Court, as an
independent and impartial judicial body prosecuting
situations where national jurisdictions are unable or
unwilling to address the issue of accountability, is
crucial. We call on all States Members of the United
Nations that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome
Statute and its amendments, and thereby help achieve
its universality. We also support other international
accountability mechanisms such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March