
(spoke in Chinese):
China has concerns about draft resolution A/73/L.94,
entitled “Towards torture-free trade”, which was
submitted by the European Union.
First of all, it is important to emphasize that
China is a party to the Convention against Torture.
We have always firmly opposed torture, unremittingly
promoting the rule of law, human rights protection
and the prohibition of torture in legislation, law
enforcement, justice and monitoring. China’s position
on the draft resolution has nothing to do with the issue of
torture and does not affect or change China’s principled
position of firmly opposing and prohibiting torture.
China is seriously concerned that the main sponsors
of the draft resolution are linking trade with human
rights issues. That could be used in future for political
purposes to artificially create barriers to international
trade on account of human rights, thereby having a
negative impact of the free flow of international trade.
The draft resolution also includes capital punishment
in its scope, which has no basis in international law.
As is known, all countries have serious differences on

the issue of the death penalty. Countries should decide
whether to apply the death penalty in line with their
national circumstances and cultural traditions. The
draft resolution disregards the diversity of cultures,
traditions and judicial systems among different
countries in the world by imposing the suspension or
abolition of the death penalty on other countries.
The draft resolution deals with torture, capital
punishment, trade and human rights and their
interrelationships, aiming to establish common
international standards and turn them into international
law. It covers a wide scope with a far-reaching impact.
Member States must be able to study it carefully and
in-depth and build consensus through full consultation.
On the contrary, there have been only three informal
consultations on the draft resolution. While many
countries still have fundamental difficulties with the
draft, the main sponsors are insisting on submitting it to
the General Assembly for consideration. This practice
of imposing their will on others is not constructive.
For those reasons, China will vote against the draft
resolution and hopes that other countries will take the
same position.