
I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Estonia, Lithuania and my own

country, Latvia. We align ourselves with the statement
made by the Head of Delegation of the European Union.
We welcome this annual General Assembly
debate on the responsibility to protect (R2P). The
implementation of the responsibility to protect should
be a standing item on the General Assembly agenda,
as it provides an opportunity to take stock and hold
a dialogue among the States Members of the United
Nations on the topic.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have supported
the principle of the responsibility to protect since its
adoption at the 2005 World Summit, and we reaffirm
our commitment today. Protecting populations from
acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity must be a global priority.
However, the responsibility to protect should not be
perceived as an international issue alone. Sovereignty
entails responsibility; it is the primary responsibility of
individual States to protect all populations within their
territory from atrocity crimes.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the responsibility to protect, which focuses
on lessons learned for prevention (A/73/898). The
Baltic States — staunch supporters of international
law, democracy and human rights — fully support the
Secretary-General for placing the issue of prevention at
the centre of the United Nations agenda. Regrettably,
the report reaffirms the negative trends in the
implementation of the responsibility — the growing
gap between our words of commitment and actual
protection of populations against atrocities.
We are extremely concerned about deliberate
attacks against civilians, civilian infrastructure,
journalists, humanitarian and medical personnel and
infrastructure during armed conflict. The illegal
proliferation of arms and weapons, easily accessible
to atrocity perpetrators, also has a negative impact on
the protection of civilians. We continue to advocate the
protection of populations against atrocities and express
our deep concern at attempts to downgrade atrocities
committed by former totalitarian regimes — memories
that are still alive in our countries.
We, as individual Member States and as the
international community, must do our utmost to translate
our words of commitment into practice and to improve
the effectiveness of atrocity-crimes prevention. Greater
focus and energy should be put into prevention rather
than response, before atrocities are carried out. Once

the point of acute violence has been reached, options to
respond to crises are quite limited. The political will to
act swiftly is essential.
Despite certain setbacks, we recognize the
progress achieved in operationalizing the R2P concept,
which can save lives. We note the successful measures
taken to strengthen resilience to atrocity crimes at
the national and regional levels. The report of the
Secretary-General, as with all 10 previous reports on
the responsibility to protect, provides useful practical
policy recommendations based on best practices and
lessons learned from past situations.
With the help of available prevention tools
we must better translate early-warning signs into
timely preventive action to avoid repeating the tragic
mistakes of the past. That can be done by developing
and integrating early warning in national policies
and by addressing the root causes of risks, with, inter
alia, education, training and building resilience to
atrocity crimes.
For us, human rights, good governance and the rule
of law are central to prevention. With strong national
institutions, transparent and accountable political
leadership and respect for the rule of law, efforts to
prevent atrocity crimes can be more effective. Atrocity
prevention is deeply linked to the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, including Goal 16, on
the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies.
The protection of human rights is imperative to
the prevention of conflicts. Furthermore, systematic
human rights violations are often important warning
signs of political crises. Regional and international
human rights mechanisms and their recommendations,
as well as the Human Rights Council, can provide
useful support and guidance to Member States. In
addition, civil society, media and journalists positively
contribute to developing early-warning and response
systems by raising public awareness about human
rights violations and crimes against humanity.
We appreciate the ongoing efforts to improve the
system-wide capacity of the United Nations to prevent
and respond to serious and systematic violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. In
that regard, we are pleased that the Secretary-General
remains committed to the Human Rights Up Front
initiative, which can help ring the alarm bell before
abuses escalate into atrocity crimes.

We welcome the recent appointment of Ms. Karen
Smith as the new Special Adviser on R2P. We wish her
success in advancing the R2P agenda across the United
Nations system and with Member States. We also
appreciate the dedicated work of the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng.
The early action and response of the United Nations
is critical to R2P implementation. Operationalizing
the R2P concept through the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations is among the most direct
ways by which organizations can prevent atrocity
crimes. We applaud the innovative ways of the United
Nations political and technical support to civil society
organizations in enhancing prevention efforts at the
grass-roots level.
The Security Council, which has a special
responsibility to take timely and decisive action
in situations of imminent risk of atrocity crimes,
should use all available tools to prevent such crimes,
including United Nations early-warning capacities and
mechanisms. In order to ensure a more effective Security
Council response to the outbreak of brutality against
innocent people, we strongly support both mutually
reinforcing initiatives — the French-Mexican proposal
to voluntarily limit the use of the veto at the Security
Council in situations involving mass atrocity crimes
and the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. We are encouraged by the major support
for those important initiatives.
Finally, we wish to express our deep concern about
impunity for mass atrocity crimes. Accountability must
be ensured through thorough national investigations
and prosecutions of persons responsible for the most
serious crimes. Furthermore, independent international
accountability mechanisms, including the International
Criminal Court, and better judicial cooperation
between States and the Court are essential elements
in delivering justice. We concur with the SecretaryGeneral that atrocity crimes are preventable. Swift and
concerted action for the responsibility to protect is the
answer to how we can do so. We call on all Member
States to uphold that important political commitment
and stand against inaction and impunity regarding
mass atrocity crimes.