
(spoke in Arabic): It is my
honour to address the Council today on my own
behalf and on behalf of my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Canada, as co-facilitators for draft
resolution A/73/L.95, entitled “Commemoration of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the International
Conference on Population and Development”.
The International Conference on Population
and Development, held in Cairo in 1994, and its
Programme of Action are important means to promote
the issue of population. The Conference set out a new
and progressive vision on the relationship between
population and development, and between prosperity
and the rights of the individual. The Conference held
in Cairo saw the adoption by 179 States of the 20-year
Programme of Action, which was extended in 2010,

as a comprehensive indicator of development progress
based on the individual. The Programme of Action was
pivotal in promoting sexual and reproductive health,
the empowerment of women and gender equality,
which are the cornerstones of the population and
development agenda.
The issue of population is the common platform
that forms the basis of the Cairo Programme of Action,
specifically, and other development plans in general.
Success in implementing the Cairo Plan of Action will
certainly bolster efforts to achieve 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Based on all this, Egypt and Canada were keen to
submit a procedural draft resolution to commemorate
25 years since the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development was held in Cairo. The
draft resolution sets aside an evening session on 16 July
for the General Assembly to commemorate 25 years
of the Conference and to serve as an opportunity to
exchange viewpoints and lessons learned with the aim
of advancing national, regional and international efforts
to expedite the implementation of the outcome of the
Conference and contribute to the Nairobi meeting in
November. We wanted this commemoration to coincide
with the High-level Political Forum so as to benefit
from the high-level participation of Member States and
stakeholders, including the private sector, academia
and civil society, as well as to strengthen links for
implementing the two agendas.
With a view to ensuring good and constructive
relations with all delegations of Member States, in recent

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

weeks Egypt and Canada have held a series of bilateral
consultations with a large number of them, as well as
with regional groups. During those consultations, we
listened to their proposals and views on the procedural
draft resolution. That was followed by three sessions
of governmental consultations, on 6, 10 and 18 June,
during which we examined the procedural rules and
agreed practices. All those consultations and meetings
have led to the draft resolution in its current form.
In conclusion, on my behalf and on behalf of my
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Canada,
I would like to thank all delegations for their positive
involvement in and support for our efforts as facilitators
of the governmental consultations. We would also like
to thank the delegations that sponsored the procedural
draft resolution. Let me further thank all colleagues in
the Secretariat, the staff of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly and the United Nations
Population Fund for their efforts and sincere cooperation
with the delegations of Egypt and Canada during the
preparation of this procedural draft resolution.
We look forward to seeing the President of the
General Assembly and others on the evening of
16 July to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population
and Development.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.95, entitled
“Commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population
and Development”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.95: Argentina, Australia, Benin,
Cabo Verde, the Central African Republic, Comoros,
Djibouti, Eritrea, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Japan, Lebanon, Libya, Kenya, Kiribati, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Yemen and Zambia.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.95?
Draft resolution A/73/L.95
(resolution 73/303).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of position
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
(spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt would like
to explain its vote before the voting on draft resolution
A/73/L.94, entitled “Towards torture-free trade:
examining the feasibility, scope and parameters for
possible common international standards”.
Egypt stresses its firm belief that the prevention of
torture and other forms of harsh, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment is an inalienable right under
international human rights law and should not be
breached under any circumstances. Furthermore, we
believe that the prevention of torture is an obligatory
norm of international human rights law.
In principle, we support the measures to promote
international cooperation within the United Nations
with a view to prohibiting goods that are used only for
torture. Egypt would have liked to join the consensus
on the draft resolution had it been accurate enough in
dealing with the main objective of the text, that is, to
put an end to trade in goods used for torture.
However, we would like to take this opportunity to
express our reservations on a number of issues related
to the draft resolution and to the manner in which it was
presented to the General Assembly.

First, not enough time was allocated for
discussing the draft resolution, and it was presented
by the co-sponsors directly in the General Assembly,
bypassing the Third Committee and all other relevant
mechanisms, including the Human Rights Council.
This represents a serious precedent in the handling of
human rights issues at the United Nations.
The delegation of Egypt has on more than one
occasion expressed its reservations on the methods
used in the conduct of the negotiations and on the
failure to take the views of a large number of States into
account, in addition to the lack of necessary data on the
controversial issue of the draft resolution, in spite of the
repeated requests made by many countries during the
relevant negotiations.
Secondly, Egypt’s main reservation on the draft
resolution is reflected in its possible impact on
international trade and the possibility of the use of
common international standards to be clarified in
future as obstacles to trade, as well as setting politicized
and non-neutral conditions on certain States based on
alleged claims regarding their human rights records,
thereby preventing certain goods from reaching them.
Thirdly, the draft resolution clearly links torture
and other forms of harsh, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment on the one hand, and capital
punishment on the other. This linkage has been the goal
of many States in the past with a view to calling for the
abolition of capital punishment, based on the text of the
draft resolution regarding the need to put an end to the
trade of goods related to torture or capital punishment,
despite the rejection of this linkage by a large number
of countries.
Egypt emphasizes that article 6 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights gives States
the sovereign right to apply capital punishment for the
most heinous crimes in accordance with their national
jurisdiction and applicable rules.
In view of the aforementioned reservations, Egypt
will vote against the draft resolution and calls upon
other countries to do the same.