
At the
outset, I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening the first formal meeting of the
General Assembly on the responsibility to protect, and
to express our appreciation to Australia and Ghana for
their leadership in including this topic on the agenda
of the General Assembly. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment and
conviction to the principle and to welcome his report,
entitled “Responsibility to protect: from early warning
to early action” (A/72/884), with its ongoing focus on
prevention, which follows that of last year (A/71/1016).
Since world leaders made their commitment to the
concept of the responsibility to protect at the historic 2005
World Summit, we have made considerable progress in
the area. The Secretary-General has provided Member
States with an annual report since 2009 and appointed
a Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. For
their part, Member States have participated annually in
General Assembly informal dialogues on the occasion
of the Secretary-General’s report and have decided to
include the issue of the responsibility to protect on the

Assembly’s agenda. Furthermore, 60 Member States
have joined the Global Network of R2P Focal Points,
while 50 are working together as members of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect in New York
and Geneva. However, while acknowledging the great
strides that have been made in past years, we must also
recognize that there is still a gap between our desire
to protect vulnerable populations and the reality on
the ground. We should be alarmed by the details in
the report of the Secretary-General, which states that
battle-related deaths have increased tenfold since 2005
and the number of people forcibly displaced has reached
record levels. In that regard, I would like to highlight
three points with regard to the responsibility to protect,
while bearing in mind the recommendations outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report.
First, we must continue to improve existing earlywarning mechanisms at the domestic, regional and
international levels and strengthen synergies among
them to make the prevention of atrocities a practical
programme. As the Secretary-General points out in
his report, the international community’s capacity
for early warning and atrocity-crime risk assessment
has improved considerably in recent years. There are
a variety of useful tools across the United Nations
system, regional and subregional arrangements and
structures such as the United Nations Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes and the Human Rights
Up Front initiative. We must redouble our efforts to
improve effective communication and consolidate more
systematic approaches to early-warning signs.
Secondly, no matter how effectively early-warning
mechanisms work, the responsibility to protect cannot
be realized if their results are not followed by early
action. The Security Council has a special responsibility
for preventing atrocity crimes, mandated by the 2005
World Summit Outcome. In that regard, as a supporter
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group’s code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or
war crimes, and of the political declaration by France
and Mexico, the Republic of Korea is of the view that
the use of the veto should be limited in situations
where immediate action is required in response to mass
atrocity crimes. We must also make better use of the
tools of the United Nations human rights system, such
as the Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic
Review and special procedures, among others, which
can help identify possible risks early on and facilitate

relevant action by national Governments as well as the
international community.
Thirdly, we must continue our efforts to end
impunity and ensure accountability for atrocity crimes
in every corner of the world, since strengthening
accountability is one of the principal ways to prevent
such crimes. It is imperative to ensure that violators of
international law are held accountable for their crimes
through prosecution in national and international
criminal justice systems, including the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, I would also like to
emphasize that justice mechanisms must strengthen
their engagement with civil society, given that it can be
a crucial ally in enhancing their ability to gain access
to critical information, as well as in strengthening
contacts with victims and witnesses.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the commitment of the Republic of Korea
to the responsibility to protect. I look forward to
continuing to work with other Member States with a
view to helping to protect vulnerable people from
acts that the international community as a whole has
condemned as the most egregious crimes.