
(spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement (see A/72/PV.99) on an issue
that is so important to the international community. I
would also like to express my country’s appreciation
for the leadership role that Australia and Ghana
have undertaken, which has proved invaluable in
incorporating the responsibility to protect into this
session of the General Assembly, and to say that we
hope to see the issue become a permanent item on
its agenda.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group
of Friends for the Responsibility to Protect (see A/72/
PV.99), and I would also like to make some comments
on issues of importance for us.
Uruguay once again affirms its firm commitment
to the responsibility to protect. In that regard, we want
to highlight its first and second pillars, on prevention,
in the understanding that force should only ever be
used as a last resort and should always comply with
all the assurances enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, including the express consent of the
Security Council. We therefore advocate a preventive,
comprehensive and holistic approach and welcome
the Secretary-General’s most recent report, entitled
“The responsibility to protect: from early warning to
early action” (A/72/884), in which he stresses that the
effective prevention of atrocity crimes must be placed
in a broader context of the international community’s
efforts to prevent crises and suffering.
States are primarily responsible for protecting their
peoples and for ensuring that human rights are respected
within their borders. They must also ensure that the
perpetrators of such heinous crimes are investigated,
held accountable and prosecuted. Accountability is
important not only in combating impunity and injustice
but also in functioning as a deterrent. In that belief,
Uruguay was the first country in Latin America to
fully implement the Rome Statute of the International

Criminal Court in its domestic legislation and therefore
appeals to all States that have not yet done so to become
party to the Statute and cooperate fully with the Court.
I would also like to underscore that the prevention of
atrocities is most effective when national, regional and
global actors work in a coordinated and cooperative
manner. Uruguay is a member of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect and is part of the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points, as well as the Latin
American Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity
Prevention. These initiatives strengthen national and
regional preventive capacities and help us to foster
confidence-building among States.
I should also highlight the importance of
international, regional and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention, in addition to the role of
peacekeeping operations as an effective tool in
preventing atrocity crimes. Peacekeeping operations
help to prevent or mitigate abuses by States or rebel
groups and are effective early-warning instruments for
possible violations of human rights and other crimes.
As a troop-contributing country, Uruguay adheres to
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
and therefore supports the importance of conducting
predeployment training programmes on the effective
protection of civilians so that contingents are properly
equipped before being deployed in the field.
It is especially important to ensure that the Security
Council, which according to the Charter bears the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, spares no effort and provides effective
measures to protect the civilian population, including
by referring cases to the International Criminal Court
when appropriate. As a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, Uruguay supports
its code of conduct for Council resolutions relating to
the protection of populations against genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,
and we urge States that have not yet done so to join
that initiative. We also support France and Mexico’s
proposed political declaration on the suspension of the
veto powers of the permanent members of the Security
Council in cases of mass atrocity.
In conclusion, the effective implementation of the
responsibility to protect requires a complementary
approach, including concerted action among States,
cooperation with the Security Council, the Human
Rights Council, the International Criminal Court and
the various United Nations agencies and collaboration

with global and regional organizations, as well as
civil society. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Global Centre for the Responsibility to
Protect and the other non-governmental organizations
that work valiantly to ensure that the principles of the
responsibility to protect and the protection of human
rights are implemented.
The reality of the twenty-first century has shown
us a world convulsed by violations of the most basic
human rights perpetrated by both armed groups and
States. These are crimes that are carried out in total
contempt for human life. Only concerted efforts on the
part of all actors can enable us to continue strengthening
the consensus on the responsibility to protect and bring
relief to the millions of innocent human beings who
are suffering.