
Croatia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the observer of
the European Union. I will add several points in my
national capacity.
Croatia very much welcomes this plenary meeting
on the responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing. It has been nine years since the last
General Assembly debate on the responsibility to
protect, in 2009, and in the light of that regrettably
long hiatus, we especially appreciate the renewed
opportunity to reaffirm our support for the commitments

made in 2005. Additionally, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report this year on the responsibility to protect
(A/72/884), providing us with guidance and practical
advice on the improvement of early-action assessment
and early-warning mechanisms.
Croatia would like to pay tribute to Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, whose mandate as the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect
ended earlier this year. We salute his tireless efforts
to mainstream the responsibility to protect within the
United Nations system. We also commend the work
of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng. We believe the progress achieved
so far, particularly in the practical and operational
understanding of the concept within the United Nations
system, should be maintained and expanded. In that
regard, Croatia advocates for the swift appointment of
a new Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
The world we live in today has changed profoundly
since the adoption of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (resolution 60/1) and the initiation of
the responsibility-to-protect concept. From today’s
perspective, it would seem almost impossible to reach
a similar consensus on the issues of human rights and
protection of civilians from mass atrocities, which is
yet another reason to preserve what we have gained and
use it as a springboard for future action.
Conflicts across the globe are continuing to
escalate, with mounting civilian casualties and deeply
wounded societies. Against that background, we must
spare no effort to restore confidence in the United
Nations institutions and our collective security. Primary
responsibility for protection lies with States, but for the
sake of the importance of the United Nations, we should
improve our way of reaching collective decisions,
especially in situations of grave violations of human
rights and breaches of international humanitarian law.
We encourage the Security Council to address
potential mass atrocity risks and to include prevention
on its agenda in a more effective manner. We call
for Security Council debates on the responsibility to
protect and for Council briefings by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Advisers on early-warning signs.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of
the adoption of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. They are
among the most important documents in the history of

the United Nations. They paved the way for practical
solutions to threats of mass atrocities and for the
mechanisms of timely and decisive action in the form
of the responsibility to protect. However, the early
enthusiasm lost its momentum, being replaced by
restrained and often ineffective collective action. In
addition, the use of the veto in the Security Council
impedes the protection of human rights in situations
posing a risk of mass atrocity crimes.
On the positive side, the meeting of the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points, held earlier this month and
generously hosted by the Governments of Finland and
Mexico, reaffirmed the growing support for the values
and norms guided by the responsibility to protect. That
serves as a good example of how to enhance the global
importance of the responsibility to protect among an
ever-widening group of supporters, with a view to
better implementing the principles of the responsibility
to protect in our national and global frameworks.
Croatia is concerned about the troublesome trends in
the use by some of forced displacement as a tool of war,
thus bringing disastrous consequences upon civilian
populations. Today more than 68 million people remain
displaced around the world. There are many causes of
such misery. One of them is certainly our inability to
achieve a consensus on upholding the provisions of the
responsibility to protect and preventing the commission
of mass atrocity crimes against populations at risk.
My country, unfortunately, has been very familiar
with a similar situation in the past. Therefore, and
while currently serving as a member of the Human
Rights Council, Croatia advocates for strengthening
the links of the Geneva-based institutions and the
Council’s mechanisms of special procedure mandates
and universal periodic reviews in preventing and
responding to mass atrocity crimes.
In May, Croatia assumed the Chair of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe for
a six-month term. This is our first chairship since we
became a member of the Council of Europe in 1996. We
are determined to continue promoting and protecting
the universality and indivisibility of fundamental
rights and combating all forms of discrimination and
intolerance. In that vein, Croatia has established the
efficient protection of rights of national minorities
and vulnerable groups as a theme and priority for
its presidency. It aims to improve the system for the
protection of rights of national minorities and ensure a

safe and just environment for its implementation, based
on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
In our view, respect for human rights is an
essential element in supporting human and sustainable
development, and it is the best way to prevent conflict.
It is our global and human responsibility.