
(spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the President for having convened this
formal debate on the responsibility to protect, which is
a priority for Peru. We are also particularly grateful for
the Secretary-General’s report in this regard (A/72/884).
This formal debate comes after nine years
of informal interactive dialogue and represents a
further step towards the consolidation of a principle
that is inherent in the promotion and protection of
human rights and closely linked to the obligations
undertaken by the Peruvian Government. We reaffirm
our commitment to the principle of its three pillars,
starting with the recognition of the fact that the
responsibility to protect falls primarily on States, with
the objective of strengthening rather than undermining
their sovereignty.

Peru is committed to international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We are party
to the key international instruments in both areas,
whose provisions are duly reflected, developed and
implemented in our domestic legislation. In this
connection, during our current term in the Security
Council, we are according a high priority to its
responsibility to protect civilians in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We feel compelled to
express our deep regret and concern about the impunity
with which international humanitarian law is being
violated today, in many cases without the Security
Council living up to its responsibilities.
We want to emphasize, therefore, that it is the moral
and legal obligation of the members of the Council to act
with unity to put an end to the suffering that for various
reasons afflicts millions of people in countries such as
Yemen, Syria, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Myanmar, Somalia, the Central African
Republic, Libya and Palestine. In that connection, we
want to underscore that 116 States, including Peru, have
signed a code of conduct that commits us to act in a
timely and decisive manner to prevent and put an end
to atrocity crimes.
Here we reiterate that the sovereignty of each
State should be understood to include the primary
responsibility for the protection of its population
and that, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, when national authorities fail to protect
their populations, the international community must
shoulder that responsibility.
Peru also highlights the fact that a number of
peacekeeping operations deployed by decision of the
Security Council have mandates to protect civilians,
including ones in which Peru’s own army is involved.
However, all States must abide by international
humanitarian law and train their armed forces to that
end. Peru has adopted various initiatives in this regard,
reflected in the impeccable performance of our troops
deployed in several peacekeeping operations.

early-warning mechanisms and achieve a rapid
transition to early action. It is important to strengthen
existing preventive capacities and promote mechanisms
for genuine accountability. Among other things, this
implies full respect for the rule of law at the national
and international levels. It is therefore essential to
address the root causes of conflicts and ensure that
human rights are upheld. To that end, it is equally vital
to ensure accountability for the commission of atrocity
crimes, and here the International Criminal Court plays
a vital role. We therefore encourage all States to accede
to the Rome Statute and cooperate with the Court. We
also urge the Security Council to refer atrocity cases
to the Court in situations where it is necessary to
guarantee access to justice and prevent impunity.
We would like to conclude by reiterating Peru’s
commitment to the responsibility to protect and by
expressing our gratitude to the Special Advisers to the
Secretary-General for their outstanding work.