
(spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to congratulate the
President of the General Assembly on the initiative
to convene today’s debate on the responsibility to
protect. We would also like to congratulate Ghana and
Australia on their efforts to include the issue as part
of the formal agenda of the General Assembly. We
commend Secretary-General António Guterres on his
determination to make the issue an absolute priority.
As the Assembly knows, civilians account for the
vast majority of victims in armed conflicts marked by
ongoing and very serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Gabon is of the view that any attack
on civilians is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law. The responsibility to protect people and prevent
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity lies primarily with States, both in
times of peace and during war. That responsibility also
extends to protecting refugee camps. I also want to
take this opportunity to reiterate Gabon’s commitment
to international criminal justice and the fight against
impunity so as to ensure that those responsible for
serious crimes are held accountable for their actions
before competent national or international courts.
My country affirms its commitment to the standards
set by the responsibility to protect, particularly the
implementation of the three pillars — prevention,
encouraging the international community and
collective action in the case of a State’s failure. I take
this opportunity to commend the Secretary-General on
his personal commitment to preventing conflict in the
world, which is the best antidote to mass crimes. We
also appreciate the efforts of the Special Advisers of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect.
My country has prioritized dialogue and the quest
for national consensus as a way of preventing and settling
disputes within our society. The same commitment to

dialogue is at the core of our foreign policy, and we
have spared no effort to peaceably resolve conflicts
with our neighbours and offer our good offices to settle
crises in sister countries. Gabon’s commitment to peace
and the protection of the civilian population is behind
its commitment to peacekeeping missions, for example
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
In that regard, I would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Blue Helmets and to peacekeeping
contingents throughout the world. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are a special instrument for
protecting civilians. We deplore the fact that they have
to be conducted in areas where, regrettably, there is no
peace to keep and where the lives of the Blue Helmets
can be at risk. I urge the United Nations to strengthen
the benefits of peacekeeping by providing missions
with the proper resources.
Gabon welcomes the fact that the Security Council
has placed the protection of civilian populations at the
core of the mandates of many peacekeeping missions,
as well as its focus on gender-based violence. We
support current efforts to better equip contingents at
the predeployment stage and during their missions to
ensure the protection of vulnerable groups, in particular
women and girls.
Above all the considerations and profound
differences affecting our world, our Assembly has the
responsibility to promote the effective implementation
of the responsibility to protect so as to better preserve
the human dignity that we share.