
We would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
responsibility to protect with a special focus on
lessons learned for prevention (A/73/898). The report
identifies the principal areas where timely action and
constructive engagement can facilitate the prevention
of atrocity crimes. Addressing the underlying sources
of past atrocity crimes and focusing on truth, justice
and reparations is paramount in that regard.
Armenia remains strongly committed to advancing
the prevention of mass atrocities and the crime of
genocide, as well as identity-based discrimination
against all groups and peoples. Countering hate speech
as one of the early warning signs, which may lead to
the incitement to violence, should be an integral part
of the prevention mechanisms. We need to join efforts
to develop a workable set of actions with the human
rights-based approach in mind to promote tolerance as
an essential step on the way to more inclusive societies.
In that regard, we welcome the recent initiative of
the Secretary-General to launch the United Nations
Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech, which was
elaborated by the Special Adviser for the Prevention
of Genocide.
Nowadays, we continue to witness the spreading of
hate speech, racial and ethnic profiling, the glorification
of hate crimes, and the denial and justification of
past atrocities, including the crime of genocide. It is
especially deplorable when odious policies of denialism,
which are an offence to the dignity and memory of the
victims of genocide, are led and encouraged by public
figures and high State officials. Such denials and
justification manifest a flagrant subversion of the fight
against impunity for atrocity crimes. They undermine
the important efforts of the international community to
prevent situations in which the crime of genocide could
be committed.
We believe that educational and cultural
institutions, together with civil society and faithbased organizations, have a greater role to play in
enhancing understanding and informing perceptions
and ideas around prevention as a concept. Since 2015,
Armenia has hosted the Global Forum Against the
Crime of Genocide. The third Global Forum, which
took place in December 2018, was organized with the
support of the Office on Genocide Prevention and the

Responsibility to Protect and in cooperation with the
International Association of Genocide Scholars and
was dedicated to prevention through education, culture
and memorialization.

upon. The need for open conversation on most serious
violations of human rights that can lead to genocide,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is still
very pertinent.

Prevention is not and has never been a simple
process, as very often neither societies nor international
institutions are fully prepared to thoroughly identify
early warning signs and assess risks. Armenia attaches
great importance to the universal ratification and
comprehensive observance of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
And we view education as a tool for contributing to
awareness-raising of past genocides and promoting the
right to truth.