
Romania aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the observer of the
European Union and by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility
to Protect.
Romania commends the inclusion of the subject of
today’s debate, on the responsibility to protect (R2P),
in the formal agenda of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly, as my country was one of the nine
Member States that made this request.
We welcome the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsibility to protect (A/73/898) and
its focus on lessons learned for prevention, as we believe
that the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity is fundamental
for the peace and stability of our world. We welcome
also the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral and the measures proposed to be taken both at
the national and international levels in order to advance
this agenda.
In our national capacity, we are determined
to work for the prevention of international crimes,
and in this respect my country has taken several
measures. We appointed a national contact point
from the Romanian Public Ministry to the European
network for investigation and prosecution of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. In 2005, we
established the Elie Wiesel National Institute for the
Study of the Holocaust in Romania, and in 2018 the
Network for Genocide Prevention and Multidisciplinary
Research into Mass Graves, aimed at building the
capacity to prevent and investigate genocide. Romania
is also an active member of the International Holocaust
Remembrance Alliance, including in the area of the
prevention of genocide.
My country ratified the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and has enacted national legislation in accordance with
its provisions. Romania disseminates knowledge about

the principles of the Convention, including judicial
training through courses on public international law
and through seminars for justice professionals. The
Romanian Public Ministry, in cooperation with the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and other Government
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations,
organizes training for judges and State officials
involved in criminal investigations on topics pertaining
to the Holocaust, genocide prevention and mass
grave investigations.
In 2015, Romania submitted its unilateral
declaration accepting the compulsory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, as part of our
commitment to international law and in recognition of
the prominent contribution of the Court to international
peace. We encourage others to consider taking action
in support of the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations.
We share the Secretary-General’s focus on
the importance of early action when it comes to
responsibility to protect. Romania is fully committed
to the protection of civilians, supports humanitarian
action and has joined several international initiatives
aimed at protecting the population, especially

vulnerable groups, such as children. We are also
engaged with police officers and military personnel in
ensuring that peacekeeping missions have a protection
of civilians mandate.
My country believes that regional organizations
have to play a key role in preventing and responding to
mass atrocities, as they can assess the situation on the
ground and the regional context at first hand. That was
stressed during the ninth annual meeting of the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points, which took place in May.
In conclusion, I would like to add my voice to
those who showed support today for the principle of
the responsibility to protect and acknowledged the
importance of developing preventive capacities. Allow
me to also express my appreciation for the activities
of the Global Centre for R2P, both as secretariat of the
Global Network of R2P Focal Points and as a United
Nations partner in promoting R2P globally.