 £G

aleyaueraye]

 

Informal interactive dialogue on the Responsibility to
Protect

6 September 2017

Joint statement on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden

Delivered by Ambassador Mr Tore Hattrem
Permanent Representative, Norway

 

Mr President,

Ihave the honour of speaking on behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.

We would like to express our gratitude to you Mr President for convening this informal
interactive dialogue. We thank the Secretary General for preparing the ninth report on
Responsibility to Protect, and the panellists for their efforts to put atrocity prevention into
practice. The implementation of R2P requires a cross cutting approach.

The Nordic countries welcome this year’s focus on accountability for prevention. We
especially welcome the intention of the Secretary General to put R2P at the heart of his
prevention agenda, and invite him to report to us next year on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in this year’s report.

Mr President, the Nordic countries are committed to the principles of World Summit
Outcome Document on Responsibility to Protect and the implementation of its three pillars
as outlined in the paragraphs 138 and 139.

At the outset of this year’s debate, we are deeply concerned by the current increase of
atrocity crimes.

(Check against delivery)

Permanent Mission of Norway to the United Nations, 825 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022.
Phone: (232) 421-0828 Fax: (212) 688-0554 www.norway-un.org As highlighted in the Secretary General's report, implementation of the Responsibility to
Protect requires an investment in prevention and accountability of those responsible for its
implementation.

Let me emphasize six points of particular importance.

First, we must work to ensure full respect for international law, especially the UN Charter
as well as humanitarian law and human rights law.

Second, we must hold those who commit atrocity crimes accountable in order to prevent
future violations. All states have a responsibility to prosecute individuals who perpetrate
atrocity crimes. Situations where states are unable or unwilling to prosecute should be
referred to the International Criminal Court.

Third, we must strengthen the role of the Security Council in preventing atrocity crimes as
the guardian of international peace and security. The inability of the Security Council to
protect civilians has impaired its credibility. We urge all governments to join the "Code of
Conduct regarding Security Council action against atrocities", and we also emphasize the
importance of the French and Mexican Political Declaration on Veto restraint.

Fourth, we must pay careful attention to the gender perspective, ensuring adequate
training and responding to systematic sexual and gender-based violence, and recognizing
that gender equality and women’s participation is critical to successful implementation of
R2P.

Fifth, we must further integrate the prevention of atrocity crimes into our efforts to ensure
human rights and international humanitarian law. We welcome the report’s suggestion to
apply the Framework of Analysis in the national context and in the Universal Periodic
Review. We also welcome the Secretary General’s continued support to the continuation of
the Human Rights Up Front Initiative, improving the secretariat’s capacity to respond to
serious violations and prevent mass atrocities.

Sixth, in order to prevent atrocity crimes we must address the root causes of conflict and
violent extremism conducive to terrorism, by ensuring respect for human rights and rule
of law, and working toward effective sustainable development without discrimination of any
groups. The responsibility to protect means that we all need to do what we can to close the gap

between aspiration and implementation. The Nordic countries are committed to doing
their part.

Thank you.