Seventy-second session

99th plenary meeting

Monday, 25 June 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/884)
The President: We are here to talk about the
responsibility to protect, and for the first time in nearly
a decade, we are doing it through a formal debate.
As we know, the responsibility to protect is complex.
The concept was born in 2005, and it has evolved and
developed a great deal since then. There are three
elements that I want to highlight in particular today.
First, I will address people. We know what kind of
crimes and violations are covered by the responsibility
to protect, namely, genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. Those are all
legal terms and definitions. But we cannot forget that
behind them are real people — people who have been
killed, who have been stripped of their humanity and
who have seen things that no one should have to see.
Survivors have told their harrowing stories in this very
Hall. I listened to many when I travelled to Rwanda in
May. I heard about how genocide ripped societies apart
and about the trauma and pain, which will never fully
disappear. Yes, we are here to discuss the responsibility
to protect. It is rooted in international law and in the
Charter of the United Nations. But what we are really
talking about is people and the responsibility that

Governments and the international community have to
them and to humankind.
Secondly, I would like to speak about prevention.
I believe that it is the core of the responsibility to
protect, to do everything we can to avoid reaching
the point where humanity is lost. But I want to be
frank, prevention is hard work. It does not always
make the headlines. It often takes place behind the
scenes, over a long period of time, and it requires a
real investment in terms of both time and money. It
means making institutions stronger and more capable
of protecting the people they serve, providing technical
assistance to countries that need to build their earlywarning systems, lending humanitarian support and
protection for the most vulnerable people, supporting
grass-roots groups, including women’s networks,
which can flag voting patterns of discrimination, hate
speech or intolerance, promoting the rule of law and
human rights, ensuring accountability for violations of
humanitarian law and intensifying diplomatic efforts if
things start to go downhill. As I said, all of that is hard
work, but it is worth it. Prevention can save people from
experiencing the horrors of atrocity crimes and, more
pragmatically, it can save money. Let us use the same
example of Rwanda. A recent World Bank and United
Nations study states that every dollar invested there in
preventing the recurrence of violence has saved $16
over the past two decades.
Thirdly, with respect to the General Assembly,
the concept of the responsibility to protect was born
here. This organ held a high-level plenary meeting
(see A/60/PV.2 to A/60/PV.8).on the responsibility to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

protect during its sixtieth session. As members of the
Assembly know, that led to the universal adoption of
the concept at the 2005 World Summit, and formally
in resolution 63/308 four years later, in 2009. Although
eight informal dialogues have been held, today is the
first formal meeting on the responsibility to protect
since then. I therefore think that this is a good time
to remind ourselves of the weight on our shoulders.
The Assembly is the most representative organ of the
United Nations. It gives every Member State a seat
and a platform. Its main job is to take the Organization
forward and to work towards the values outlined in its
Charter. That is why it has been the birthplace of the
most ambitious frameworks the world has seen, and
many of them are related to our discussion today — for
example, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Genocide Convention.
I would like to point out the link between the
responsibility to protect and the United Nations
Charter. It is a very clear one. All action under the
responsibility to protect must take place within the
parameters of the Charter, including the principle
of State sovereignty. But more than that, we have all
committed, through the first line of the Charter, to save
future generations from the scourge of war, and the
responsibility to protect is based on that very objective.
I therefore believe we have a serious job today. It does
not mean that we all have to agree. We can debate, have
different opinions and offer our own views; but let us
not forget that this Organization was born from horror.
Every State Member of the United Nations has made a
commitment to confining such horrors to history, and
the responsibility to protect can help us to meet that
commitment. It therefore deserves our full attention
today.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this formal
debate of the General Assembly on the responsibility
to protect — the first, as the President said, since
2009. This discussion is more critical today than ever
as we strive together to protect people from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Global leaders unanimously endorsed the
responsibility to protect at the 2005 World Summit.
Following genocides a decade before, in Rwanda and
Srebrenica, and at a time of profound global divisions,
that was a breakthrough. The imperative was clear:

do more to protect people and do so as a united
international community.
Yet today there is still fear that the principle could
be used to take collective action for purposes other than
those agreed on in the World Summit Outcome. There
are also concerns about possible double standards and
the selective use of the principle in the past. That is why
open and frank exchanges such as this are necessary to
dispel misconceptions and mistrust. We have to forge
mutual understanding and establish stronger support for
the responsibility to protect as a key tool of protection
and prevention.
Let us remember that the primary responsibility
for protecting people rests with States. As the World
Summit Outcome document states,
“Each individual State has the responsibility to
protect its populations ... This responsibility entails
the prevention of such crimes, including their
incitement ... We accept that responsibility and will
act in accordance with it.” (resolution 60/1, para.
138)
Indeed, protecting its people is a fundamental part of a
State’s exercise of its national sovereignty.
In that spirit, my latest report on the responsibility
to protect (A/72/884) proposes various steps that States
can take to strengthen their capacities, including
conducting national risk assessments and designing
policies to address any vulnerabilities. Expanding the
participation of civil society is also critical to enhancing
early warning and ensuring the effectiveness of national
human rights institutions and ombudspersons.
I also encourage Member States to ratify and
domesticate instruments of international law that
relate to the prohibition and prevention of the crimes
and violations referred to in the Summit Outcome.
As of today, 45 Member States have still not ratified
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide. In a year when we mark
the Convention’s seventieth anniversary, achieving
universal ratification would send a welcome signal
of resolve.
Let us also recall that the international community
has a responsibility to support States in fulfilling that
task. Again, let us listen to the words of the World
Summit Outcome:

“The international community, through the
United Nations, also has the responsibility to use
appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other
peaceful means, in accordance with Chapters VI and
VIII of the Charter, to help to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.” (ibid., para. 139)
Regional organizations have a role to play in
helping Governments address the risks and precursors
of atrocity crimes. Networks of States can also be
valuable in developing partnerships, mechanisms and
good practices. In the past month, approximately one
third of the members of the Assembly met twice to
advance such efforts: first in Kampala, together with
civil society organizations, under the umbrella of the
Global Action Against Mass Atrocity Crimes; and
again in Helsinki, for the annual meeting of the Global
Network of the Responsibility to Protect Focal Points
The United Nations will continue to support
Member States, especially those that might be facing
fragility and stress, in strengthening institutions,
defending human rights and fortifying the cohesion
of society. That is an essential part of my prevention
agenda. The Offices of my Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect provide vital support in that regard.
Only when peaceful means are inadequate and
national authorities are manifestly failing to protect their
populations can there be a responsibility for collective
action. But let us be clear here too: the responsibility to
protect does not create a new mechanism for intervention
or coercion. The Summit Outcome stipulates that any
such action is to be carried out
“through the Security Council, in accordance with
the Charter, including Chapter VII, on a case-bycase basis” (supra.).
It is clear that today’s discussion takes place against
a backdrop of atrocity crimes being committed at a
scale and ferocity not seen in years, with little regard
for international human rights and humanitarian law.
We are witnessing deliberate attacks against civilian
and non-military infrastructure, such as hospitals
and schools, leading to large-scale civilian casualties.
We are seeing rampant sexual violence, the denial
of life-saving aid and the widespread and systematic
targeting of specific ethnic groups that could amount
to acts of genocide. None of those crimes is inevitable
or a by-product of conflict. All atrocity crimes are

preventable and can never be justified. That was the
reason for my official letter to the Security Council last
September on the plight of the Rohingya in Myanmar
(S/2017/753). It is important to build the consensus
needed to mount desperately needed responses to
ease suffering and end violence. Our overarching
challenge is to uphold the principle while preventing its
misuse. That means acting promptly, preventively and
diplomatically before situations escalate and spiral out
of control.
A positive example was set by the international
community when it decided to act in the Central African
Republic when there was a high risk of a genocidal
killing spree. An International Commission of Inquiry
established by the Security Council later concluded that
timely action by the African Union, the United Nations
peacekeeping operation and French peacekeeping
forces amid ongoing fighting prevented an even greater
explosion of violence.
The World Summit Outcome stresses the need for
the General Assembly to continue its consideration of the
responsibility to protect, and I strongly encourage it to
do so. We must support the efforts of intergovernmental
bodies to prevent atrocity crimes, including by making
better use of the tools at the disposal of the Security
Council, such as accountability mechanisms. At this
time of extreme challenges, we must not abandon
the responsibility to protect or leave it in a state of
suspended animation, finely articulated in words but
breached time and again in practice. Lofty principles
mean little if they cannot be applied when they matter
most. The credibility of the international community
and, above all, the lives of millions rest on us.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, which consists of 50 Member
States and the European Union and is co-chaired this
year by Italy and the State of Qatar.
We would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly and the Secretary-General for their
statements, and Australia and Ghana for their leadership
in including the responsibility to protect on the agenda
of this session of the General Assembly. We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884). We commend his prioritization of

early warning and early action to prevent genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
and for recognizing that the responsibility to protect is
a key element of that important agenda. We welcome
the report’s recommendations and encourage Member
States to implement them.
The commitment made by all States Members
of the United Nations to the responsibility to protect
at the World Summit in 2005 was historic. The
Group of Friends reaffirms its strong commitment
to paragraphs 138, 139 and 140 of the World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1) and the three pillars of the
responsibility to protect.
Today marks the first formal debate of the General
Assembly on the responsibility to protect since 2009.
The inclusion of the responsibility to protect on the
Assembly’s formal agenda reflects the will of the wider
United Nations membership regarding the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing. We urge the United Nations
membership to consider the merits of including the
item permanently on the formal agenda of the General
Assembly. Continued dialogue in the Assembly
will promote the building of consensus on what the
international community can do to prevent such
heinous crimes.
The acceptance of the responsibility to protect
through the World Summit Outcome remains a key
commitment of the international community to protect
populations that face the threat of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes, and ethnic cleansing. At
this time, the Group would like to reiterate its common
understanding that the responsibility to protect
reinforces, rather than undermines, State sovereignty.
As the Secretary-General underlined in the presentation
of his priorities to the General Assembly earlier this
year, it is necessary to overcome the false contradiction
between human rights and national sovereignty. Human
rights and national sovereignty go hand in hand. The
achievement of human rights strengthens States and
societies, thereby reinforcing sovereignty. States with
effective, accountable institutions are among the best
defenders of human rights.
Since 2005, considerable progress has been made
by the United Nations, Member States and other
stakeholders, including civil society, in operationalizing
our commitment to the responsibility to protect at the
national, regional and international levels. International

and national actors have been successful in creating
frameworks for identifying risks, developing earlywarning mechanisms, articulating inhibitors of atrocity
crimes and creating new institutional mechanisms.
Today’s formal debate gives States an important
opportunity to share national experiences, best practices
and effective strategies for preventing atrocities.
Over the past decade, we have seen the creation and
expansion of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect in both New York and Geneva, the
establishment and growth of the Global Network of
R2P Focal Points, and the inclusion of the responsibility
to protect in at least 69 Security Council resolutions,
including in the mandates of a number of United
Nations peace operations and in resolutions of the
Human Rights Council. Important initiatives, such as
the code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes
and Human Rights Up Front have supported efforts
to prevent atrocity crimes and continue to serve as
important tools for mainstreaming atrocity prevention
and strengthening prevention capacities.
The prevention of atrocities is at the core of each
of the three pillars of the responsibility to protect.
Member States should better utilize the entire United
Nations system to effectively prevent and respond to
their perpetration. As the 2018 report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Responsibility to Protect suggests,
we should make a concerted effort to continue to
report on progress towards the implementation of
the responsibility to protect and bring situations of
imminent risk of atrocity crimes to the attention of the
General Assembly, the Security Council and th Human
Rights Council, as needed. For example, the Human
Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) is
well-placed to support preventive efforts. We encourage
Member States to better utilize the UPR processes as a
preventive mechanism.
This year we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which
was created in response to violent conflict in order
to prevent future violent conflicts. In addition to
embodying the international community’s commitment
to the promotion and protection of human rights for all
individuals around the world, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the treaties that derive from it
are, in the words of the Secretary General, the best
prevention tool we have.

The General Assembly should also play a more
active role in supporting States in their efforts to
carry out their primary responsibility to protect their
populations. The Security Council should consider
situations where there is potential for mass atrocities at
the earliest possible stage, including through utilizing
working methods such as situational awareness
briefings and Arria Formula meetings.
We also strongly emphasize the role of women in
the prevention of atrocity crimes, as they are crucial
for early warning and peacebuilding, promoting
cooperation and capacity-building and creating more
cohesive and inclusive societies. We should take
concrete steps to end all forms of discrimination on the
basis of gender and to empower women as agents of
atrocity prevention, including by ensuring that all girls
have equal access to quality education.
As recognized in the Secretary-General’s report,
we need to mobilize all the resources at our disposal and
broaden the constituency of actors engaged in atrocity
prevention. In that respect, we specifically welcome
recent efforts by the General Assembly and the Security
Council to recognize and promote the participation of
youth in conflict prevention and resolution.
Accountability for the perpetrators of atrocity
crimes is among the most effective ways of preventing
recurrence. States have the primary responsibility
to investigate and prosecute international crimes
committed within their jurisdiction, and national
accountability efforts should be encouraged and
supported, including by strengthening judicial
cooperation among States.
We urge States to comply with their international
legal obligations and thoroughly investigate and
prosecute persons responsible for genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes or other serious
violations of international law, as well as to strengthen
judicial cooperation with other States for that purpose.
International investigative mechanisms, including
fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry,
can support efforts to promote accountability and
bring situations of concern to the attention of States.
Additionally, international courts and hybrid tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court, provide
complementary avenues in appropriate circumstances
to enable accountability.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support
for the United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention

and the Responsibility to Protect, and we encourage the
Secretary-General to appoint a Special Adviser on the
Responsibility to Protect. The Special Adviser and the
Joint Office have a key role in assisting Member States
in the operationalization of the responsibility to protect.
We reiterate the significance of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide as an effective international instrument
for the prevention and punishment of the crime of
genocide. To mark the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Genocide Convention on 9 December,
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
launched an appeal for its universal ratification, which
is supported by the Secretary-General. We strongly
encourage States that have not yet ratified or acceded to
the Convention to consider doing so as a matter of high
priority and to ensure its implementation at the national
level. Ratifying and complying with the Convention is
an affirmation of the commitment to “never again”.
We recognize the important role national and
international civil society can play in supporting
the further advancement and implementation of the
responsibility to protect. In particular, we would like
to thank the Global Centre for the Responsibility to
Protect for its invaluable work as the secretariat of the
Group of Friends, both in New York and Geneva.
At a time when more than 68.5 million people are
displaced as a result of armed conflict, atrocities and
persecution worldwide, we hope that during this debate
we can collectively identify implementable strategies
that can effectively prevent atrocities and protect
populations around the world from atrocities.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Ms. Adamson (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the inclusion of
today’s debate on the responsibility to protect on the
formal agenda of the General Assembly at its seventysecond session. It is very apposite to be discussing our
responsibility at a moment when there are allegations
of mass atrocities being committed in various corners
of the globe.

The European Union, like the United Nations, was
born after the horrors of the Second World War, in a
spirit of “never again”. The responsibility to protect is
at the core of our primary goal, which is to enable our
populations to live in peace and security. When we fail
in our responsibility to protect, we fail our very reason
for being here.
It is a well-established principle that prevention is
far more effective than reaction, and that is where the
European Union concentrates the implementation of its
responsibility to protect. Our efforts, and those of the
international community, must now focus on making
prevention more effective. In that context, we support
the Secretary-General’s broad focus on prevention,
which fully resonates with the European approach to
security, as envisaged in the Global Strategy for the
European Union’s Foreign and Security Policy. In the
wider agenda of preventing conflict and sustaining
peace, atrocity prevention must become central. The
ongoing reform of the United Nations should enhance
synergies, capacities and accountability across the
system to make it fit to address the multisectoral
challenges of preventing atrocities.
In that context, the European Union welcomes the
focus of this year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/884), entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
early warning to early action”. Improving our earlywarning capacity and, based on our assessments,
moving quickly to early action is the key to the
effective prevention of crimes against humanity, war
crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing. The European
Union and its member States will take all the relevant
recommendations of the report under consideration to
inform our policies and actions.
The European Union particularly welcomes the
threefold strategy for strengthening early action
proposed by the Secretary-General in his report. We will
continue strengthening our capacity to prevent atrocities
and supporting partner countries in strengthening their
own. Through a multidimensional approach, using all
available policies and instruments, the responsibility
to protect has been made an integral part of the
Global Strategy for the European Union’s Foreign and
Security Policy. Our conflict early-warning system
includes the risk of mass atrocities taken into account
in European Union policy considerations. Atrocity
prevention has been integrated into our field missions
and operations working for the protection of civilians,
as well as into capacity-building programmes guided

by the new European Consensus on Development.
We are preparing a dedicated, evidence-based toolkit
on atrocity prevention to provide the staff of our
diplomatic, military and civilian missions with handson knowledge of how they can assess the risks of
atrocity prevention and what they can do to support it.
In our experience, as stressed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, regional organizations can have
an added value in atrocity prevention, thanks to
their specific early-warning mechanisms, conflict
prevention and resolution capacities and potential for
channelling assessments, good practices and lessons
learned. The European Union encourages relevant
regional organizations to embed the principles of the
responsibility to protect in their practice and priorities,
and to take appropriate action to help prevent atrocity
crimes. Appointing a focal point on the responsibility
to protect, as the European Union has done, would be
a useful and necessary step for regional organizations
to raise awareness about the principle internally and
among their membership, with a view to consolidating
and enhancing atrocity-prevention activities. The
European Union stands ready to share its experience
with other regional actors.
Guidance, coordination and support from the
United Nations to its Member States are crucial in
preventing atrocities. The EU will continue to support
the Secretary-General’s Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect in their efforts to mainstream the prevention of
atrocities across the United Nations.
We would like to thank Mr. Ivan Šimonović
, former Special Adviser on the Responsibility to
Protect, for his work in that area. Now that his mandate
has ended, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
intention to quickly appoint a new Special Adviser. In
our view, the next Special Adviser should preferably
have relevant experience in making atrocity prevention
operational. Once someone is appointed, we encourage
the Secretary-General to ensure that he or she has
access to all the information and decision-making
processes necessary to inform and support assessments
and actions regarding the responsibility to protect.
As the Secretary-General stresses in his threefold
strategy, we must continue promoting accountability for
atrocity prevention. The European Union and its member
States remain committed to efforts to end impunity for
mass atrocities at the national and international levels.

States have the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute crimes committed within their jurisdictions,
while international courts and hybrid tribunals can
play an important role where States are unwilling or
unable to do so genuinely. We actively promote the
universality of the Rome Statute and foster capacities
for accountability and reconciliation, which are key
elements for non-recurrence, through our support for
the International Criminal Court.

of mass atrocities effective, thereby responding to our
responsibility to protect.

Within the United Nations system, the Security
Council should use all available tools in the exercise
of its responsibility to protect populations from
mass atrocities. The General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and human rights treaty bodies and
mechanisms, as well as the Security Council, must
also be mobilized in preventing those atrocities. The
Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front initiative
works as an enabler of enhancing system-wide capacity
in the United Nations to prevent mass violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

The Forum members would like to thank the
Secretary-General and the President of the General
Assembly for their statements. We also commend the
Secretary-General for his report (A/72/884) and its
focus on the importance of early warning and early
action in response to the risk of mass atrocities.

The EU wholeheartedly endorses the third
dimension of the Secretary-General’s proposed strategy
for early action through expanding civilian action for
atrocity prevention. We have been encouraging dialogue
among a wide spectrum of national and international
civil society actors, and we have been supporting their
efforts in conflict and atrocity prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding. We support the role that women
and youth can play in de-escalating tensions and
building peace in their communities. We acknowledge
the importance of engaging religious leaders and
faith-based actors in the fight against discrimination
of minorities, hate speech and other risk factors for
mass atrocities.
The EU expects a rich and fruitful debate today. We
encourage States to voice their support for the principle
of the responsibility to protect and, outside this Hall,
to devise and exchange views on ways to strengthen
preventive capacities. In view of the challenges that the
world is facing today, we would welcome the inclusion
of the responsibility to protect as a formal item on the
agenda of the General Assembly at its coming sessions.
From the outset, the EU has been a staunch
supporter of the principle of the responsibility to protect.
In partnership with other States and with regional and
international organizations, in particular the United
Nations, we will continue working to make prevention

Mr. Tito (Kiribati): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum members
represented at the United Nations, namely, Australia,
Fiji, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall
Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Kiribati.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
implementation of the principle of the responsibility
to protect principle, as set out in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome, must be
our collective focus. Our task is not to renegotiate or
reinterpret the commitment our leaders made in 2005
but to implement it.
We welcome the debate in the General Assembly
today. Our hope is that this can be part of an ongoing
dialogue in the Assembly about how we can better
protect populations from mass atrocities, including by
sharing experiences, perspectives and lessons learned
to help improve practice internationally, regionally and
domestically. We agree with the Secretary-General
that implementing the responsibility to protect and
prioritizing prevention in the United Nations system
are interlinked and complementary. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights, preventive capacities
should be cultivated at all levels so that early warning
also means early action.
The Pacific Islands Forum members believe that
early dialogue, partnership and action, particularly
at the regional level, are critical to delivering on
our responsibility to protect. The importance of
early warning and early action was recognized
and enshrined by Forum leaders in a declaration in
Biketawa, Kiribati, at the beginning of this century.
That important document recognizes the vulnerability
of all Forum members to civil unrest and other threats
to our population’s security. The declaration articulates
a common commitment to resolving conflict through
regional cooperation.

The declaration has served as the springboard for a
number of regional assistance missions. That includes
the highly successful Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands (RAMSI), which commenced in 2003
and concluded last year. The Mission was a partnership
among the people and the Government of Solomon
Islands and 15 contributing members from the Pacific
region. The Mission’s mandate was to help lay the
foundations for long-term stability and prosperity in
Solomon Islands, including by restoring civil order,
restoring the machinery of Government and helping
rebuild the economy.
The consent of Solomon Islands and its partnership
were prerequisites for the Mission, as well as essential
elements in its success. RAMSI’s regional identity
was its core underlying strength. Every Pacific
Island Forum country participated in RAMSI, which
benefited from the diverse cultures and experiences
of its contributing members. Since 2003, thousands
of police, military and civilian personnel from across
the region served with RAMSI, working side by side
with Solomon Islanders. Another critical reason for
RAMSI’s success is that assistance was requested and
provided in the early stages of unrest, lawlessness and
violence. The warning signs were present and action
was taken. That is an example of the second pillar of the
responsibility to protect in action.
Pacific Islands Forum leaders have committed to
negotiate an updated Biketawa-plus declaration, to guide
regional responses to emerging security challenges. At
the heart of that commitment is a recognition that no
one country can meet the security challenges we face
alone.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia. We also
align ourselves with the statement delivered earlier by
the observer of the European Union.
We strongly support holding a formal General
Assembly debate on the responsibility to protect, and
we are glad that this formal debate is taking place
today after nine years of informal discussions. The
implementation of the responsibility to protect is an
important topic that deserves to be a standing item on
the General Assembly’s agenda.
We thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report, which focuses on options to further improve
early warning and strengthen early action. The
report reminds us that the international community

continues to fall short in preventing atrocity crimes and
protecting vulnerable populations. We fully agree with
the Secretary-General in his summary that
“[i]t costs far more to pick up the pieces after crisis
than it does to prevent crisis.” (A/72/884, p.1)
With the help of available prevention tools, we must
better translate early-warning signs into timely
preventive action to avoid repeating the tragic mistakes
of the past. Massive failures in the responsibility to
protect are particularly glaring today as we mark
the seventieth anniversary of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
It is the primary responsibility of individual States to
protect all populations within their territory from mass
atrocity crimes. The timely identification of risks and
detection of early-warning signs of atrocity crimes can
help save lives through action. We note from the report
that some Member States and multilateral organizations
have strengthened those capacities over the past few
years. It is crucial to continue such preventive efforts,
including by developing and integrating early warning
into national policies and addressing the root causes of
risks. With strong national institutions, transparent and
accountable political leadership and respect for the rule
of law, efforts to prevent atrocity crimes can be more
effective. The protection of human rights is crucial to
the prevention of conflicts. Furthermore, systematic
human rights violations are often important warning
signs of potential crises. In that regard, regional and
international human rights mechanisms and their
recommendations can provide useful support to Member
States. Civil society, the media and journalists can also
positively contribute to developing early-warning and
response systems by raising public awareness about
human rights violations and crimes against humanity.
Timely action is a crucial component of the
responsibility to protect concept. We welcome the
inclusion of lessons learned in the report, as they
provide useful guidance on factors that could affect
effective early action. We also agree that actions taken
jointly by local, national, regional and global actors can
be more effective. Too often, however, States are not
willing or able to prevent or respond to mass atrocities.
It then is the international community’s duty to live
up to its responsibility to protect. The United Nations
system has a particular role to play in advancing and
operationalizing the concept of the responsibility to
protect, including through the protection of civilians

in peacekeeping operations. We would like to take this
opportunity to thank the previous Special Advisers on
the Responsibility to Protect for their hard work and
commitment, and we hope that the new Adviser will be
appointed soon.
The Security Council has a special responsibility to
take timely and decisive action to prevent the outbreak
of brutality against innocent people. Unfortunately,
on too many occasions, the right of the veto has been
abused and has left the Council paralysed. We therefore
support the proposal to voluntarily limit the use of the
veto at the Security Council in situations involving
mass atrocity crimes and in accordance with the code
of conduct requiring the members of the Council not to
vote against any action intended to stop or prevent mass
atrocity crimes.
We encourage the Secretary-General to continue
his good offices in bringing situations involving
the imminent risk of atrocity crimes to the attention
of the relevant regional and United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council. We emphasize the need
to ensure accountability for mass atrocity crimes. We
urge States to thoroughly investigate and prosecute
people responsible for the most serious crimes. Our
countries will continue to support the work of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which is essential
to operationalizing the concept of the responsibility to
protect. Referrals to the ICC by the Security Council
are necessary when there is evidence that atrocity
crimes have been committed with impunity.
Exactly 100 years ago, Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania chose their path to building open,
democratic and inclusive societies based on cohesion,
multilateralism, equality, inclusion and the rule of law.
The path has not always been easy, and we treasure
what we have achieved. Today we remain committed to
the implementation of the responsibility to protect. We
call on all United Nations States Members to uphold
that important political commitment. We all must do
what we can to protect civilian populations from the
threat of atrocity crimes.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia was pleased to
partner with Ghana to propose this important debate,
the first General Assembly debate on the responsibility
to protect in this decade. In 2005, the world’s leaders
declared that we must never again react with indifference
in the face of mass atrocity crimes. Leaders agreed on
the three pillars of the responsibility to protect as the

guiding principles for preventing and responding to
such crimes. Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
aptly described the responsibility to protect as narrow
but deep. It is narrow, because it focuses on atrocity
crimes — genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity; and deep, as its implementation
is necessarily multidimensional, while requiring action
at the national, regional and international levels.
Although the collective commitment to the principle of
the responsibility to protect is strong, there remains a
significant gap between it and the daily reality for many
populations across the world. The implementation of
the responsibility to protect must be our focus.
Australia thanks the Secretary-General for his
insightful remarks today and his report (A/72/884) on
the responsibility to protect, which includes concrete
and sound recommendations for its implementation.
We agree with him that the implementation of the
responsibility to protect is an essential part of the pivot
to prevention in the United Nations system. Effective
prevention requires the participation of society as a
whole, from civil society to religious and community
leaders. It requires action by States at the domestic,
regional and international levels. We must do better at
identifying the early-warning signs of mass violence
and, critically, summon the political will for early
action. In Australia’s view, action at the regional level
is essential for the meaningful implementation of the
responsibility to protect.
In the Pacific region, the members of the Pacific
Islands Forum, including Australia, agreed to the
Biketawa declaration 18 years ago in Kiribati. That
important document recognizes the vulnerability
of all members to civil unrest and other threats to
their populations’ security. It articulates a common
commitment to resolving conflict through regional
cooperation. The declaration has served as the
springboard for regional assistance missions that have
successfully restored law and order, rebuilt national
institutions and supported economic growth. The
consent of, and partnership with, receiving States
were the prerequisite to those missions and critical to
their success, an example of the second pillar of the
responsibility to protect in action. After all, no one
country alone can meet the security challenges we face.
The horrors of the Second World War were fresh in
the minds of the drafters of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Charter they created endows the Security
Council with unique powers. The use of those powers

to protect populations from mass atrocities was central
to the drafters’ vision for the Organization. That is why
we joined 113 others in supporting the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct,
a commitment to refraining from vetoing Security
Council action in cases of mass atrocity. We also
encourage all States, but especially Security Council
members, to join Australia and the 95 other Member
States that support France and Mexico’s initiative on
veto restraint.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
diversity of tools that must necessarily be in the
responsibility-to-protect toolkit. We agree that existing
human rights mechanisms, such as the Universal Periodic
Review process, play an important role in advancing
the prevention of mass atrocities. Strengthening
accountability for atrocity crimes is another important
way that we can close the implementation gap.
Australia firmly believes that holding to account those
responsible for serious international crimes, whether
at the domestic or international level, is critical for
inclusive and sustainable peace. Where perpetrators
commit atrocities with impunity and where justice fails
victims, the seeds of future mass violence are sown.
Our leaders saw a leading role for the General
Assembly in discussing the implementation of the
responsibility to protect. While the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council have invoked the
responsibility to protect in their discussions and actions,
the Assembly has remained mute. Australia believes
that the Assembly is an essential forum for inclusive,
comprehensive and regular discussions on how we can
better implement our common commitment to prevent
mass atrocities. We look forward to the dialogue today
on the responsibility to protect and its implementation.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): I join previous speakers
in thanking the Secretary-General for his excellent
report on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884). We
are encouraged by the report’s focus on early warning
and the means of strengthening early action through a
threefold strategy and approach to the implementation
of the responsibility to protect.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative
of Qatar on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect.
I would like to recall that Ghana and Australia
called for the inclusion of this subject on the agenda

of the General Assembly and for the formalization of
our debate on this important principle by reason of our
conviction that sincere and transparent dialogue, devoid
of dramatization, would allow for building consensus
on the responsibility to protect.
At the outset, I want to reiterate Ghana’s view that
the principle of the responsibility to protect remains
relevant, both as an expression of political commitment
and as a blueprint for action to prevent and end
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. We
support the framework for the implementation of the
responsibility to protect based on the three equal and
mutually reinforcing pillars of the principle, namely the
primary obligation of States to protect their peoples, the
collective responsibility of the international community
in those efforts, and strategies to ensure the timely and
decisive collective responses necessary to effectively
meet the principle’s laudable objectives, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations.
Ghana believes that the implementation of the
responsibility to protect through enhanced national,
regional and global collaboration on effective
prevention strategies would contribute to prioritizing
the Organization’s prevention agenda and strengthen
accountability for atrocity crimes. We endorse the
position that the pace of implementation can be improved
through strengthened mechanisms for accountability
across the legal, moral and political spheres, together
with clearly defined relationships between the three
phases of the principle.
My delegation also finds merit in the Brazilian
initiative on responsibility while protecting, as it
provides clarity in the strategy for implementing the
responsibility to protect, particularly in relation to
accountability and transparency. Going by the most
recent developments, that already appears to be a
promising direction for reaching desired outcomes in
the implementation of the responsibility to protect.
Building resilience at the community, national,
regional and global levels involves developing
functional institutions of good governance at all levels.
They must be anchored in a robust human rights
regime and driven by the principles of local ownership,
transparency, dialogue and inclusiveness, respect for
diversity, accountability, equity, the rule of law and
solidarity. In addition, building stability and resilience
in transitional societies also requires a cautious and
deliberate balance between retributive and restorative

justice. In our view, good governance guarantees
national stability and peace, which are authentic marks
of State sovereignty.
My delegation shares the view that regional and
subregional arrangements can help to further develop
capacities for early warning and assessment of atrocity
crimes through a review of their current response
capacities and the support they give to their respective
member States. In that regard, we wish to stress that
national ownership of regional strategies is a sine
qua non for sustainable and transforming action in
the responsibility to protect. We have learned from
situations that have played out in parts of Africa and the
Middle East that acts of omission or commission at the
national and regional levels are critical in determining
whether prevention and robust ex post facto intervention
will be effective or will be undermined.
It is worth mentioning that the African Union,
at its fiftieth anniversary summit in 2013 in Addis
Ababa, undertook to promote a holistic and systematic
approach towards attaining the 2020 target of a
conflict-free Africa. African States have therefore
committed to the speedy implementation of existing
instruments of human rights, rule of law, democracy,
elections and good governance. The strategic Conflict
Prevention Framework of the Economic Community of
West African States, under implementation since 2007,
and the Monrovia Declaration, on the development
of capacity in mediation efforts, are also particularly
relevant in that regard.
Mr. Biang (Gabon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Ghana is deeply appreciative of its continued
partnership with like-minded countries — Australia,
Italy, Qatar, Denmark, Rwanda, France, Costa Rica
and Finland, to name a few — in promoting national
and regional ownership and implementation of the
responsibility to protect. We commend the Joint Office
of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, the Global Centre
for the Responsibility to Protect and the International
Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect for their
support and active engagement with Member States and
regional organizations, and call for their cooperation in
the development of options to enhance early warning
and early action.
Ghana attaches great importance to collaboration
with civil society as strategic partners in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect. In our

national experience, non-partisan support in favour of
civil-society organization initiatives by various political
parties and our Parliament helped in the creation of
Ghana’s National Peace Council as an independent
State institution of mediation and peace facilitation.
The National Peace Council today is an important part
of Ghana’s governance and peace architecture, as well
as a key component of relevant strategic partnerships
forged with bilateral, regional and global institutions.
The complementarity of the different pillars
of governance and peace infrastructure and their
interactive nature came into play during the Supreme
Court hearing on Ghana’s presidential election petition
in 2012. The hearing and its outcome demonstrated
the role of the judiciary, as an important pillar of
governance and peace, in promoting the rule of law
and safeguarding electoral integrity. Other national
institutions that played a critical role in the process
included the independent Electoral Commission; the
Inter-Party Advisory Committee; the executive, through
its National Security Council; traditional authorities;
the National Peace Council; the National Commission
for Civic Education and faith-based institutions.
Clearly, building capacity for good governance
and peace should encompass all institutions in the
business of development and institutions in the area of
constitution-building, the rule of law and accountability
oversight, as well as independent watchdog and
advocacy agencies. We want to stress that building
prevention capacities at the community and national
levels must be prioritized, together with the effective
mobilization of the requisite resources for the effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect.
In closing, my delegation calls on Member States to
declare their support for the responsibility to protect and
to enable all views to be considered in the preparation
of the report and outcome of this debate. Finally, the
combined effect of the responsibility to protect, the
responsibility while protecting and the responsibility to
remember should help us make progress in preventing
and ending genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, and in building resilience.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to align
myself with the statements made earlier by the observer
of the European Union and by the representative of Qatar
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility
to Protect.

We welcome the inclusion of the responsibility to
protect as a formal agenda item of the General Assembly
for the first time since 2009, 10 years ago. I was at that
event, and I think it astonishing that we have waited 10
years before once again addressing the responsibility to
protect in the General Assembly. I support the calls of
colleagues for it to become a standing item.
My Government, the United Kingdom, remains
fully committed to the responsibility to protect. The
principle is outlined in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the
2005 World Summit Outcome document (resolution
60/1), which has been endorsed by all Member States.
The Secretary-General was spot on to talk about
dispelling mistrust, although at times I have the feeling
that some of that mistrust is vexatious rather than
genuine. At the same time, we acknowledge the concern
that the principle of the responsibility to protect is
sometimes used with double motives. We must fully
address that concern.
Despite the widespread endorsement of the
concept, it is disturbing to hear United Nations reports
that armed conflict and persecution have led to more
than 65 million people being forcibly displaced, more
than 22 million becoming internally displaced refugees
and 10 million people becoming stateless. If I may, I
would like to address in turn the three pillars of the
responsibility to protect.
Under the first pillar, States should uphold
their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian rights and refugee law. National
ownership is important, but it needs to be just that. It is
not a national license to mistreat one’s own population,
and there are too many examples of States that fail
the first pillar of the responsibility to protect because
they are either unwilling or unable to bear their own
responsibility to protect.
There is a fundamental tension here. The more that
Member States do not want to hold a spotlight up to
what is happening with the persecution of minorities
and other communities in a particular State, the more
likely it is that that persecution will eventually lead
to a bigger crisis affecting neighbouring States and
therefore come to the wider attention of the international
community, including the Security Council, and
increase the prospect of international engagement or,
ultimately, possibly even some form of intervention.
That intervention does not have to be military, but we
all know that sanctions remain a tool on the Council’s

agenda. So I reiterate that there is a fundamental
tension, and I think we do not give that tension enough
of our own attention in this Hall.
Under the second pillar, early warning and conflict
prevention, we support the Secretary-General’s reforms
and the linkages he draws in his report between
preventive capacities, especially those of Member
States, and the responsibility to protect. We welcome
his assessment that there should be a more systematic
and structured approach across the United Nations,
including in New York, Geneva and the field offices,
to information gathering, the assessment of atrocity
risk and collective analysis, so that Member States
can receive earlier recommendations for action and
prevention and can draw collective attention to them,
as necessary.
The United Nations Joint Office of the Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect has an essential role in helping
mainstream the responsibility to protect, both within
the United Nations and on an international level, and
the United Nations Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect have
important roles to play in bringing potential atrocity
risks to the attention of the Council. We therefore hope
that the position of Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect will be filled soon.
I would like to say a word about sustaining peace.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s vision for
sustaining peace, which rightly focuses on conflict
prevention, greater coordination across the United
Nations system and peacebuilding. Four areas of the
United Kingdom’s own focus within the sustaining
peace agenda are diversification of the approaches of
the United Nations so that it has a greater range of tools
to deploy, development to address conflict drivers,
diplomacy to de-escalate crises and create a longerterm peace, and delivery so that things can be efficient
and inclusive and can leverage partnerships.
With regard to mediation, the Secretary-General
is to be congratulated on the progress that the United
Nations has made in addressing the greater need for
mediation across the system. We all know that active
preventive diplomacy and mediation can help to prevent
atrocities, but here I come back to the tension that I
highlighted earlier. The United Kingdom has been a
staunch supporter of a strengthened and more agile
United Nations mediation capacity. We applaud the

work of the Mediation Support Unit and the Department
of Political Affairs in this critical area. Mediation has
made an important contribution to preventing and
reducing conflict around the world, and we welcome
the establishment in 2017 of the High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation.
I want to make a special reference to women.
They hold a key role in mediation, and we hope that
the United Nations can increase the number of female
special envoys nominated by the Secretary-General
and the number of women nominated for the Mediation
Standby Unit, to join the women who have been chosen.
Turning to the third pillar of the responsibility to
protect, “never again” has to really mean something.
Expelling populations and loading communities onto
trains all have a very special resonance for the United
Nations and its Member States. If countries do not
want international engagement, they must look after
their own populations to the standards that the United
Nations expects. We support the need for effective
accountability for atrocity crimes, which can help
deter recurrence. States have the primary responsibility
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdiction, while international courts and hybrid
tribunals can play an important role when States are
unwilling or genuinely unable to act.
The United Kingdom is pleased to provide
financial, logistical and political support to a broad
range of judicial and investigatory mechanisms, and
we urge others to contribute to those accountability
efforts. In particular, we encourage all States to support
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2379
(2017), which sets up an investigative team to assist
efforts to hold Da’esh accountable for crimes committed
in Iraq.
In closing, I would like to echo the words of the
Permanent Representative of Kiribati, who stated that
no one country can do this alone. The United Kingdom
stands ready to play its part, along with our international
friends and colleagues.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We meet today to address
in this setting an issue that has been a long time in the
making. The item on the agenda touches on differing
philosophical bases of inter-State ties, varied historical
experiences in the interpretation of key concepts and
sharply divergent recent experiences in translating
international precepts into practice. It is therefore
understandable that the process of deciding whether or

not to even debate the subject has led to the articulation
of strong arguments on either side of those fault lines for
the many years since the Assembly debated it in 2009.
For its part, India supported the inclusion of the
item on the agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session. We did so because we believe
that normative issues, however complex and sensitive,
should be debated. At the core of that approach is
the belief that ideas matter. Our hope is that today’s
discussion will enhance our understanding of the
fundamental precepts involved and place on record
the commonalities, as well as bring to light different
perspectives and provide an opportunity to assess
where we all stand.
India’s consistent position is that the responsibility
to protect its population is one of the foremost
responsibilities of every State and that the right to life is
one of the those from which no derogation is permitted.
We draw that not only from our present Constitution,
but from a historical tradition imbued with the same
belief. A rock edict of Emperor Ashoka in the third
century B.C. had the inscription:
“This is my rule: Government by the law,
administration according to the law, gratification
of my subjects under the law and protection through
the law.”
We therefore firmly believe that in today’s
internationalist global order, individual States can
and should be encouraged and assisted to meet such
responsibilities. Indeed, it is the responsibility of our
generation to support the evolution of such norms
of legitimacy.
In short, India, like many others, has little
disagreement with the rationale of the cardinal features
of the first and second pillars of the responsibility to
protect. However, we are of the view that appropriate
ways should be found to address the legally complex
and politically challenging issues that underlie the
third pillar. In our view, the ability of the international
community to take appropriate collective action if
a State manifestly fails to fulfil its responsibility to
protect its population is still riddled with serious gaps
that must be reflected on.
The quest for a more just global order should not take
place in a manner that will undermine the international
order itself. Resorting to force by States acting on behalf
of the international community through intervention,

as a legitimate means of enforcing rights in the face of a
State’s perceived inability to fulfil its responsibilities in
that regard, is contrary to the internationalist impulse
of our age.
Experience shows that implementing the notion
of the responsibility to protect in order to prevent or
stop major internal abuses within a State has in several
instances been used to frame or justify interventions
by external Powers. They include instances when the
Security Council failed to agree to intervene under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and
other instances when mandates have been interpreted in
a manner not envisaged by all actors. Such interventions
have destabilized entire regions and have often been
perceived to have been undertaken to further the
strategic interests of certain Powers.
At the same time, there have arguably been
other instances, well known and otherwise, in which
major abuses have been committed or continue to be
committed with impunity. Many such situations of
non-action can be attributed either to a lack of strategic
interest on the part of some or, worse, to the fact that
their specific interests will not allow for any change in
the status quo.
While the responsibility to protect, at its core, has
an appeal as a noble cause, it has been selectively used
in the context of a wider geostrategic balance of power
among competing players or groups. We are all aware
of the many critical questions that must be addressed
if that noble cause is to be pursued in an impartial
manner. How can we ensure the commonly accepted
legal definitions of the crimes we are discussing? What
will qualify as a trigger for action by the international
community? Which body is competent to take such
a decision? What happens if such a body is grossly
unrepresentative of the wider international community
and of contemporary global realities? What happens
if the record of such a body in addressing common
challenges and, consequently, its legitimacy, is in
serious question?
In short, it is our view that the current system
of collective international security, which should
be enforced through the Security Council, cannot
isolate the implementation of a concept such as the
responsibility to protect from double standards,
selectivity, arbitrariness and misuse for political gains.
The requirements that are essential to implement
the responsibility to protect — such as just causes,

right intentions, last resorts, proportional means,
reasonable prospects and the right authority to take a
decision — remain elusive and contested. Though there
is no common understanding on such concepts related
to the four crimes referred to in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, some have even sought to expand
the scope of the responsibility to protect to include
situations that may arise from pandemics, climate
change and natural disasters. We get into even greater
difficulty in such scenarios.
The current architecture of peace and security
is similar to the philosopher Bertrand Russell’s
description of the world in 1931: “The universe is all
spots and jumps, without unity, without continuity,
without coherence or orderliness”. Proceeding with
perilous interventions in such a situation is tantamount
to placing belief in a false prophet.
At this stage, there remain huge and glaring gaps
in building a common understanding on how or even
whether to proceed with such a concept in the present
system of global governance. Investing common
political will in building more representative and
inclusive governance structures nationally and globally,
strengthening capacities in global structures for greater
opportunities for much wider sections of populations
and for nations, and providing more equitable access to
resources to build and sustain peace and prosperity are
requirements that we continue to fall short in fulfilling.
We hope today’s debate will serve as a barometer
of the distance that we must all travel to meet our quest
for a common understanding of this important subject.
We should address issues in a more holistic manner so
as to ensure that the concept that we are debating today
can acquire the legitimacy that it deserves.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): This is the
first time since 2009 that the General Assembly is
holding a formal debate on the responsibility to protect,
and it is long overdue. Such a format allows us to
better articulate our ideas on an issue with outstanding
conceptual questions. Equally important, it allows for
interpretation in all official languages and for a webcast
and an official record to be produced, all of which are
crucial not only for transparency but also for us to
better understand one another’s concerns and identify
common ground.
Since 2005, the Assembly has adopted only one
resolution, of a procedural nature, on the responsibility
to protect (resolution 63/308). In the meantime, the

Security Council has adopted more than 70 resolutions
and 20 presidential statements that refer to it. As the most
democratic organ of the United Nations, the Assembly
should reclaim ownership and shape the debate on the
protection of populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
I thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884) and
take this opportunity to voice Brazil’s appreciation
for the work undertaken since the last formal debate
by all of the Special Advisers on the Responsibility
to Protect — Edward Luck, Jennifer Welsh and Ivan
Šimonović. Their work has always been marked
by respectful and constructive engagement with
all delegations.
To avoid conceptual doubts, we would have
preferred that the report of the Secretary-General refrain
from using broad and undefined expressions such as
“atrocities” as synonyms for the four responsibility-toprotect crimes. Genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity are indeed atrocious, but so
are other crimes not encompassed by the responsibility
to protect, such as aggression.
With a view to improving the method of
implementing the responsibility to protect, in 2011
Brazil circulated a concept note on responsibility while
protecting. In all interactive informal dialogues since
then, we have further deepened our suggestions in
that regard.
Prevention is always the best policy. As the
Secretary-General said, it costs far more to pick up the
pieces after crises than it does do prevent them. The
report includes recommendations for improving early
warning by developing a systematic and structured
approach so as to overcome the current fragmentation
of information-gathering and assessment. The proposed
reform of the peace and security pillar could be an
avenue for that.
But prevention should not be seen solely from a
short-term perspective — that is, focusing on situations
on the brink of collapse. It must also be addressed from
a structural perspective. Long-lasting peace requires
promoting sustainable development, ensuring food
security, eradicating poverty and reducing inequality. It
involves tackling marginalization, discrimination and
other legitimate grievances that may be at the root of
conflict. It also encompasses post-conflict scenarios to
avoid a relapse into violence.

Seen from that broader perspective, the
implementation of the first and second pillars of the
responsibility to protect has been limited by a lack
of adequate, predictable and sustainable funding.
It is disappointing, for instance, that peacebuilding
remains utterly underfunded and that the international
community is still short of meeting its official
development assistance target of 0.7 per cent of gross
domestic product.
Prevention also means giving priority to diplomacy.
Our collective responsibility does not need to translate
into collective security action in order to be effective.
We must value, pursue and exhaust all non-military
means available for the protection of civilians under
threat of violence. Preventive and responsive tools
should follow a sequential logic, meaning, above all,
that coercive measures and the use of military force
should always be our last option.
The implementation of the first and second pillars
involves little controversy, but the same cannot be said
of the third. We should engage in forward-looking
discussions aimed at finding solutions to misgivings
from the past. It is crucial to develop an understanding
of what force can and cannot accomplish. More often
than not, strategies based on a hasty resort to force
exacerbate the suffering of innocent people and lead
to negative humanitarian consequences that cause more
harm than good.
While Brazil is a strong advocate of the primacy
of prevention, we do not deny that military force
might be envisaged in exceptional circumstances,
but only in strict compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations. The protection of human rights and the
prevention of international crimes cannot be used as
an excuse to unilaterally resort to force. Our resolve to
stop such violations cannot make us turn a blind eye to
international law.
In circumstances when military action is
authorized by the Security Council or the General
Assembly, it should be judicious, proportionate and in
compliance with the mandate. It should be limited in its
legal, operational and temporal dimensions, and when
considering this exceptional measure we must demand
adequate reporting and the establishment of a panel of
experts to monitor its implementation.
There is a sense of frustration about the inability of
the Security Council to provide solutions to situations
where civilians are in danger. One aspect of the problem

lies in the Council’s composition and its methods of
work. Reforming the Security Council and expanding
both categories of its membership, has become an
overdue task for the Organization.
Another challenge in the implementation of the
responsibility to protect is ensuring that there are no
double standards. Civilians in one country are no less
deserving of protection than those in others, including
in illegally occupied territories. The current refugee
and migrant crisis also calls for a renewed commitment
to our responsibility to protect. It is inconsistent to
uphold a responsibility to protect civilians in situations
of conflict and turn one’s back on the very civilians
fleeing such scenarios when they knock on one’s door.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Today we are witnessing record-breaking levels of
human displacement, with unprecedented numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons, more than
68 million people, forced to flee their homes. The fully
man-made humanitarian and human rights crises such
as those in Syria, Burma, and South Sudan, which are
driving that mass displacement, highlight the urgent
need for all Member States to adhere to international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and for a coordinated and speedy international response
to mass atrocities.
The United States remains deeply committed
to preventing, mitigating and responding to atrocity
crimes, and we urge the international community
to do more to act in concert and respond before they
occur. We are pleased to be here today to reaffirm our
support for the responsibility to protect civilians from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity and to make a particular plea for more
timely and decisive action in the Security Council on
current and future humanitarian crises.
We are currently seeing a tremendous human toll
resulting from unchecked atrocities across the globe.
Regarding South Sudan, the Council has been paralysed
since it passed resolution 2206 (2015). Meanwhile,
more than 2 million people have fled the fighting in
the last two years. The United Nations has observed
and reported on the widespread commission of mass
atrocities and gross human rights violations in South
Sudan. We have recently renewed the Council sanctions
established under resolution 2206 (2015), but we must
do more. The United States has repeatedly called on the
Council and the United Nations to support sanctions

on those accountable for these atrocities and for a
comprehensive arms embargo. Our commitment to the
responsibility to protect should result in real action to
address modern-day atrocities, such as those in South
Sudan, yet we have too often fallen short or failed to act
when we can could or should.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
early warning and early action (A/72/884), including
the assertion that effective atrocity prevention means
helping countries to avert the outbreak of atrocity
crimes. The United States believes that more should be
done to improve our responses to early warning signals,
including overcoming the uncertainties, hesitancy and
lack of political will that impede early action. It is
worth the investment to prevent the high human cost of
those crimes.
In fact, we all know that the costs of prevention — in
the form of improving human rights institutions, the
fair administration of justice and equitable, accountable
governance — pale in comparison to the political,
financial and military costs typically required to
respond to a crisis. We applaud the Secretary-General’s
efforts to empower and coordinate a broader set of
actors, including civil society, parliaments, national
human rights institutions, regional organizations and
the entire United Nations system.
Further strengthening the principle of the
responsibility to protect and building knowledge of
the range of preventive action can also help turn early
warning into early action. To that end, the United States
supports scheduling regular, open debates in the Security
Council, including on emerging threats and human
rights issues that threaten to escalate into atrocities,
and we support including the responsibility to protect
as a standing item on the General Assembly agenda.
We also commend the Secretary-General’s
initiative on gathering and sharing lessons learned on
effective early warning and early action. We strongly
encourage him to appoint the next Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect as soon as possible in order
to advance international commitments and tools for
effective atrocity prevention within the United Nations
framework. The United States encourages Member
States to follow the Secretary-General’s call to create
a national focal point for the responsibility to protect,
conduct assessments consistent with the United Nations
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes and take

early action on the findings. It is vital that those focal
points do more than simply carry a title.
The United States continues to strengthen its
preventive capacities through the Atrocities Prevention
Board, which coordinates a whole-of-Government
approach to bolstering our ability to forecast, prevent
and respond to mass atrocities. The Board oversees
global risk analysis, followed by deeper analysis of
prioritized countries, identifying potential pathways to
atrocities and opportunities to prevent or mitigate them,
including by expanding existing resiliencies. The Board
has coordinated a range of actions, such as targeted
sanctions, preventive diplomacy and programming,
mediation, improving adherence to the rule of law,
documenting atrocities, supporting peacekeepers and
evacuating populations under attack.
While the United States recognizes the sovereignty
of all Member States, we want to remind them of the
commitments they voluntarily entered into to protect
their populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing. We
continue to work with partner countries to strengthen
coordination and share best practices, including through
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect. We
also recognize the critical role of non-governmental
organizations, the media, business and religious
leaders, and local populations, including women, in
efforts to prevent and respond to mass atrocities. The
United States actively engages with those civic actors
and organizations to enhance early-warning and earlyaction efforts, and to reflect on lessons learned.
When prevention fails, promoting accountability
for mass atrocity crimes is a priority for the United
States. Bringing perpetrators to justice can deter
those who might otherwise be emboldened to follow
in their footsteps and can help advance post-conflict
reconciliation. The United States Government is
committed to holding those responsible for atrocities
accountable by appropriately bringing them to justice
in independent and impartial processes in accordance
with fair-trial guarantees. We also recognize the
importance of programmes to support survivors and
promote reconciliation in the aftermath of atrocities, as
a history of atrocities is one of the strongest predictors
of similar future events.
The United States Government supports the
Secretary-General’s efforts to better coordinate the

United Nations system in order to prevent atrocities.
In particular, we strongly support his recommendation
that the Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict work more closely with the Joint Office
of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, and we commend
the excellent work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, particularly in the Burma context.
Women are often uniquely positioned within their
communities to identify social behaviours and patterns
that are warning signs of violence against civilians. The
United States strongly supports efforts to promote the
meaningful participation of women in the prediction
and prevention of outbreaks of mass atrocities. To that
end, President Trump signed the Women, Peace and
Security Act of 2017, making the United States the first
country to enact legislation incorporating resolution
1325 (2000) into national law.
States that disregard or violate their primary
responsibility to protect their own citizens represent
one of the greatest threats to international peace and
security we face today. Those who attempt to shield
their crimes behind a veil of national sovereignty
should find no comfort in this Hall. The Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, written in the aftermath
of war and horrors, states in its Preamble that
“disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted
in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience
of mankind” — a statement that is sadly no less true
today than it was 70 years ago, when that foundational
document was created.
We have yet to achieve the highest aspirations
laid out in the Universal Declaration, but in fully
implementing the responsibility to protect, we can
remain true to those aspirations and to our national and
collective commitments to them.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the observer of
the European Union. I will add several points in my
national capacity.
Croatia very much welcomes this plenary meeting
on the responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing. It has been nine years since the last
General Assembly debate on the responsibility to
protect, in 2009, and in the light of that regrettably
long hiatus, we especially appreciate the renewed
opportunity to reaffirm our support for the commitments

made in 2005. Additionally, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report this year on the responsibility to protect
(A/72/884), providing us with guidance and practical
advice on the improvement of early-action assessment
and early-warning mechanisms.
Croatia would like to pay tribute to Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, whose mandate as the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect
ended earlier this year. We salute his tireless efforts
to mainstream the responsibility to protect within the
United Nations system. We also commend the work
of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng. We believe the progress achieved
so far, particularly in the practical and operational
understanding of the concept within the United Nations
system, should be maintained and expanded. In that
regard, Croatia advocates for the swift appointment of
a new Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
The world we live in today has changed profoundly
since the adoption of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (resolution 60/1) and the initiation of
the responsibility-to-protect concept. From today’s
perspective, it would seem almost impossible to reach
a similar consensus on the issues of human rights and
protection of civilians from mass atrocities, which is
yet another reason to preserve what we have gained and
use it as a springboard for future action.
Conflicts across the globe are continuing to
escalate, with mounting civilian casualties and deeply
wounded societies. Against that background, we must
spare no effort to restore confidence in the United
Nations institutions and our collective security. Primary
responsibility for protection lies with States, but for the
sake of the importance of the United Nations, we should
improve our way of reaching collective decisions,
especially in situations of grave violations of human
rights and breaches of international humanitarian law.
We encourage the Security Council to address
potential mass atrocity risks and to include prevention
on its agenda in a more effective manner. We call
for Security Council debates on the responsibility to
protect and for Council briefings by the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Advisers on early-warning signs.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of
the adoption of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. They are
among the most important documents in the history of

the United Nations. They paved the way for practical
solutions to threats of mass atrocities and for the
mechanisms of timely and decisive action in the form
of the responsibility to protect. However, the early
enthusiasm lost its momentum, being replaced by
restrained and often ineffective collective action. In
addition, the use of the veto in the Security Council
impedes the protection of human rights in situations
posing a risk of mass atrocity crimes.
On the positive side, the meeting of the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points, held earlier this month and
generously hosted by the Governments of Finland and
Mexico, reaffirmed the growing support for the values
and norms guided by the responsibility to protect. That
serves as a good example of how to enhance the global
importance of the responsibility to protect among an
ever-widening group of supporters, with a view to
better implementing the principles of the responsibility
to protect in our national and global frameworks.
Croatia is concerned about the troublesome trends in
the use by some of forced displacement as a tool of war,
thus bringing disastrous consequences upon civilian
populations. Today more than 68 million people remain
displaced around the world. There are many causes of
such misery. One of them is certainly our inability to
achieve a consensus on upholding the provisions of the
responsibility to protect and preventing the commission
of mass atrocity crimes against populations at risk.
My country, unfortunately, has been very familiar
with a similar situation in the past. Therefore, and
while currently serving as a member of the Human
Rights Council, Croatia advocates for strengthening
the links of the Geneva-based institutions and the
Council’s mechanisms of special procedure mandates
and universal periodic reviews in preventing and
responding to mass atrocity crimes.
In May, Croatia assumed the Chair of the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe for
a six-month term. This is our first chairship since we
became a member of the Council of Europe in 1996. We
are determined to continue promoting and protecting
the universality and indivisibility of fundamental
rights and combating all forms of discrimination and
intolerance. In that vein, Croatia has established the
efficient protection of rights of national minorities
and vulnerable groups as a theme and priority for
its presidency. It aims to improve the system for the
protection of rights of national minorities and ensure a

safe and just environment for its implementation, based
on respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
In our view, respect for human rights is an
essential element in supporting human and sustainable
development, and it is the best way to prevent conflict.
It is our global and human responsibility.
Mr. Moragas Sánchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statements made earlier
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
This is an important meeting for several reasons.
First, this is the first formal debate in the Assembly
since 2009 on the responsibility to protect, which is
an issue directly related to the most relevant functions
and commitments of the Organization. Protecting
populations at risk of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes or ethnic cleansing is and
should be a priority for the United Nations. In Syria,
Iraq, the Central African Republic, Myanmar and
Yemen, we are witnessing daily the ravages caused by
extreme and indiscriminate violence, the persecution
of communities because of their ethnicity or religion
and the violation of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. That reality is what leads us to
believe that this agenda item should be a permanent one
in order to show our commitment to the discussion and
implementation of proposals in this area.
Secondly, this meeting is important because it
allows us to highlight the centrality of the preventive
element highlighted by the Secretary-General. My
country supports the three pillars of the responsibility
to protect. Today we are emphasizing the crosscutting preventive element, because, as we have seen
in Myanmar, for example, the costs of failing to act in
time are simply unacceptable.
Spain supports appropriate institutionalization in
the United Nations in the area of the responsibility to
protect through the figure of the Secretary-General’s
Special Adviser, with access to all the necessary
information. I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Šimonović for his excellent work in
that capacity up until March. Spain also supports
concrete initiatives, such as those articulated by the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, on the
preventive role that religious leaders can also play.

Thirdly, the meeting is important because reality
shows us that we must strengthen the links between
the various pillars of the Organization, and particularly
between the maintenance of international peace
and security and human rights, if we are to develop
a properly coordinated prevention policy. Let me
underline today the importance of the Human Rights
Council and its special mechanisms and procedures.
Human rights do not contradict sovereignty; on the
contrary, their protection is the primary responsibility
of any sovereign State.
Fourthly and lastly, this is an important meeting
because we are concerned about negative trends that
are repeated by the parties to conflicts — trends such
as the systematic use of forced displacement, the use
of hunger as a weapon of war and the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war and terrorism. Those patterns
of action could constitute crimes against humanity, war
crimes or genocide.
Let me conclude with some concrete proposals.
First, we attached great importance to the responsibility
to protect during our service a short time ago on the
Security Council, when Spain was a non-permanent
member. Together with Chile, we organized the first
meeting of the Council on this issue under the Arria
Formula. We now call on the members of the Security
Council to maximize the possibilities offered by our
working methods to incorporate that perspective. That
requires the use of the code of conduct and the restriction
of the veto, the organization of Arria Formula meetings
or the invitation of specific speakers when dealing with
high-risk situations.
We also believe that we should explore how the
Informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians
and the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security, as well as the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, can systematically incorporate the
responsibility to protect approach, when that is relevant.
In the area of the protection of civilians and peace
operations, I want to stress the importance of mandates
to protect women and children and the inclusion of
atrocity crimes in predeployment training, and that
any review should guided by the protection needs of
civilians. We also support the implementation of the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians and call
for compliance with Security Council resolution 2286
(2016), on the protection of medical equipment and

facilities in armed conflict. We also urge more States
to sign the Safe Schools Declaration.
I would also like to encourage the use of a
responsibility-to-protect perspective in the discourse
justifying our migration policies. Spain is trying to
do that, and has therefore provided a humanitarian
response to a specific crisis and is working to expand
that approach to the whole of the European Union.
I should not end without mentioning accountability.
Spain reaffirms its recognition of the work of the
International Criminal Court in this, the year of the
twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute. We call
on all States to cooperate with all mechanisms of
investigation, collection and preservation of evidence,
with the aim of facilitating accountability in the near
future, including in the cases of Syria and Iraq.
Finally, we sometimes engage in conceptual
debates that do not contribute to concrete results. To
countries that have reservations about this issue, I
would humbly say that the responsibility to protect is
not merely a function of the third pillar, and neither
is the third pillar limited to military intervention. The
question is not whether the responsibility to protect
applies to a particular situation, as States always have
the responsibility to protect their populations. What is
truly crucial and important is how to use the measures
available under each pillar to prevent and respond to
heinous crimes that we all wish to avoid.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing this
morning and for his comprehensive report (A/72/884).
I would also like to align myself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union and
with the joint statement of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, as delivered by one of the two
co-Chairs, our colleague from Qatar.
I would also like to thank Australia and Ghana for
their leadership and hard work, which is the reason
we can have this debate today, and Italy for taking
over the co-chairship of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect this year, in the light of our
2017-2018 split term on the Security Council.
I will focus on three main points, which have
also guided our work in the Security Council this
year — first, prevention; secondly, peacekeeping and
the protection of civilians; and thirdly, accountability.

First, preventing mass atrocity crimes is the core
aim of the responsibility to protect. In that regard,
early action remains one of the main challenges. When
Governments call upon the international community to
assist them, we should heed that call at the very early
stages. We believe that mediators can play a crucial
role in addressing and reconciling the interests of
different actors. In that context, mediators could also
focus on root causes of grievances. That also means
listening to young people, whose desire to participate
in decision-making over their own future is, of course,
legitimate. If we really want mediation to be successful,
we must ensure that the spoilers of peace processes
are held accountable, for example, through targeted
sanctions. The draft manual for responsibility-toprotect focal points, drafted by the Global Centre for
the Responsibility to Protect, is a useful instrument
to collect all the lessons learned and best practices,
including in the domain of mediation.
That brings me to my second point, peacekeeping
and the protection of civilians. Much has been achieved
in the area of the protection of civilians through peace
operations. However, we should not look away from the
dark pages of our history. We in the Netherlands know
that all too well. Those dark pages give us an extra
historical responsibility to help prevent mass atrocities.
We have a responsibility to remember, as our colleague
from Ghana said. We are therefore committed to
learning from the past, so improving United Nations
peace operations remains one of our priorities. We
fully support the Secretary-General’s efforts in that
regard, and we commend his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, launched in the Security Council during our
March presidency (see S/PV.8218).
Indeed, peacekeeping is one of the most concrete
tools at our disposal in protecting civilians and laying a
foundation for a safer environment. In that connection,
let me recall the importance of the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians in improving peacekeeping
operations. We call on States that have not yet done so
to endorse them.
The Security Council has demonstrated that other
initiatives can also help to ensure that the protection of
civilians and other issues related to the responsibility to
protect remain high on its agenda. In that regard, I would
like to the Council’s recent adoption of resolution 2417
(2018), on banning starvation as a method of warfare,
which was a Dutch initiative.

My third and last point is the importance of
accountability. When national judicial systems fail
to ensure accountability for perpetrators of the most
serious crimes, we should make use of the various
instruments at our disposal, and the International
Criminal Court constitutes the most appropriate path.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute. We reiterate the importance of the universal
ratification of the Statute by Member States.
If paths to justice remain blocked, we must
not waver in our efforts. A good example is the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which we adopted in this
Hall when the Security Council was blocked by the use
of the veto by one of its permanent members. Another
example is sanctions, which play an important role in
ensuring a culture of accountability. Also, in our view,
sanctions can have a preventive and deterrent effect in
averting the escalation of serious rights violations and
atrocity crimes, exemplified by the sanctions on human
traffickers recently imposed by the Security Council.
The principle of the responsibility to protect
is crucial in preventing mass atrocity crimes and
ensuring sustainable peace. All those instruments and
initiatives show that when it comes to the responsibility
to protect, the international community is more united
than it sometimes seems. However, in order to realize
effective international action in situations where action
is called for, we must do more. Ongoing dialogue
among States in the relevant international forums is
key. Here in the General Assembly, the parliament of
the world, we can do so by making the responsibility
to protect a standing agenda item. This meeting, the
first of its kind since 2009, confirms our collective
belief that implementing the responsibility to protect is
more needed than ever today. May the responsibility to
remember reinforce our collective will to prevent mass
atrocities and strengthen accountability.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): Slovenia strongly
welcomes today’s General Assembly formal debate on
the responsibility to protect, the first of its kind since
2009. We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report this year (A/72/884).
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union and by

the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
Slovenia has been a strong supporter of the
principle of the responsibility to protect from the very
start. Today we want to once again express our full and
continuing support for the principle and for the work
of the Secretary-General and his Special Advisers.
We welcome their efforts to improve the system-wide
capacity of the United Nations to prevent and respond
to serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, especially those that may amount to
mass atrocity crimes.
Today’s formal debate, and the inclusion of
the responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity on the General Assembly’s agenda at
its seventy-second session, could not be more timely,
since this is the year we celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. We join other
States in thanking Ghana and Australia for their strong
leadership in including the responsibility to protect
on the Assembly’s agenda. We support that and would
welcome the inclusion of the responsibility to protect as
a standing agenda item of the General Assembly.
In 2005 the global community decided that more
had to be done to strengthen our joint efforts to prevent
atrocity crimes and protect all populations from
ever being their victims. The latest report, however,
once again reminds us of a hard reality. We are still
looking at images of armed conflicts and acts of
violent extremism and with widespread and systematic
violations of human rights, international humanitarian
law and the rule of law in general.
Slovenia reiterates here today that no effort should
be spared to systematically invest in the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Slovenia organized and hosted
several regional meetings and academic conferences
on the responsibility to protect in 2013, 2015 and 2017
with various stakeholders from Europe, as well as
other regions. Valuable knowledge, good practices and
experiences were shared among participants, leading
to the endorsement of the Chair’s statement regarding
the responsibility to protect and the prevention of mass
atrocity crimes during the third meeting of European
responsibility-to-protect focal points. in 2017.

Time and again at the United Nations we have
heard strong calls to improve the international
community’s ability to take timely and decisive early
action. While we recognize the primary role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, a great deal can be done by Member
States, the Secretariat and the wider United Nations
system. We therefore strongly support the efforts of
the Secretary-General to improve the system-wide
capacity of the United Nations to prevent and respond
to serious and systemic violations of human rights law
and international humanitarian law. In that context, we
once again stress the importance of the Human Rights
Up Front initiative as an important tool for improving
alertness and effectiveness early on. We also encourage
the use of every other tool available, including the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.
Slovenia firmly supports the code of conduct
developed by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, and the French-Mexican initiative,
which calls on the permanent members of the Security
Council to agree to voluntarily refrain from using the
veto in situations of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We also see value in regular briefings
of the Security Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as well as by the Special Advisers to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Responsibility to Protect. Geneva-based institutions
and mechanisms such as the Universal Periodic Review
and special procedures mandate holders can play a role
in increasing early awareness and early-action efforts.
Slovenia once again affirms its strong commitment
to remaining an advocate of the responsibility to protect
and the wider promotion and protection of human rights.
We will continue to contribute in the advancement of
human rights in international human rights forums, as
well as in our role as an active member of the Human
Rights Council.
A crucial aspect in preventing the recurrence
of conflicts is ensuring accountability for all
responsibility-to-protect crimes and other serious
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law. Slovenia remains a strong supporter of the
International Criminal Court, as well as regional and
State mechanisms for countering impunity. For the past
20 years, the Rome Statute has offered an important
legal framework in this context and has acted as a
deterrent to the most heinous crimes. Slovenia will

continue to advocate for the universality of the Rome
Statute, including the Kampala amendments.
We, the Member States, have the primary
responsibility to protect our populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. It is our responsibility to meet our
obligations under international law and to condemn
any actions that go against the norms and principles
that safeguard humankind. But as we have said many
times during informal dialogues in previous years, the
obligations go beyond that. Differing views on how to
achieve that, many of which we will hear today in this
Hall, must not inhibit our joint determination and our
commitment to protecting populations in the future
from crimes related to the responsibility to protect.
Coordinated action and preventive measures require
closer and stronger links among nations. We therefore
welcome the growing network of responsibility-toprotect focal points and encourage all States to join.
In conclusion, we would also like to recognize the
contributions of the previous Special Advisers on the
Responsibility to Protect, and we are looking forward
to the appointment of the next. Once again, we reaffirm
Slovenia’s support for the United Nations Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect.
Ms. Duncan Villalobos (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility
to Protect, and welcomes the fact that for the first time
since 2009, the General Assembly has included this
item on its agenda. We are grateful for the efforts made
by Ghana and Australia to hold this discussion.
My country would like to take this opportunity
to renew its legal, moral and political commitment to
achieving the full implementation of this principle,
recognized in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome document (resolution 60/1),
and its three pillars. We call on the membership to keep
it on the formal agenda of the General Assembly. We
are grateful for the report of the Secretary-General
(A/72/884), which reaffirms the relevance and validity
of the principle and presents us with the challenges of a
much more complex international reality.
Today State and non-State actors are threatening
civilian populations and showing a total lack of respect
for human life and dignity. Every day millions of
people flee the violence and humiliation to which they

are subjected, while thousands of others are killed
with impunity. The principle of the responsibility
to protect is very closely related to the obligation of
States, expressed in many norms of international
law, international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, to refrain from systemic violations
of the human rights of civilian populations.
However, the international community has been
reluctant in protecting civilians. Thanks to political
divides and geopolitical interests, the principal organs
of the United Nations have failed to take the necessary
effective action to prevent or stop attacks on civilians.
That is why today we strongly urge the members of
the Security Council, whether permanent or elected,
to honour the Charter of the United Nations and fulfil
their mandate to ensure prompt and effective action
in upholding the Council’s primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We also
urge the permanent members to refrain from using
the veto in situations of genocide, atrocity crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Collective international action to prevent mass
atrocities must be based on impartial information
gathered in a manner not affected by political
pressures. For that reason, Costa Rica supports
initiatives such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative, and we call on the
membership to support the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group’s code of conduct on genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
In addition, we invite the Assembly to take on
the recommendations of the Secretary-General on
strengthening internal mechanisms for the early
warning and prevention of atrocities by implementing
efficient communication and collaboration mechanisms
at the national level, and through greater and better
coordination at the international level among the
principal organs of the United Nations and the
mechanisms established by the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s view that
early warning is the essence of the principle of the
responsibility to protect, taking into account prevention
in all spheres of public life. We call for incorporating

into domestic legal systems the international norms of
human rights and international humanitarian law and
for ensuring accountability at all levels of authority,
both civil and military. Furthermore, we call for the
appointment of focal points to participate in the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points.
In order to prevent the recurrence of atrocities, it
is imperative to address processes for post-conflict
national reconciliation through transitional justice, the
preservation of memory and the reconstruction of social
peace. For that, it is necessary to end impunity and
bring those responsible to justice, and to refrain from
granting immunity and amnesty to the perpetrators. We
invite those who have not yet done so to sign the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court and all its
amendments. We call on all of us that are States parties
to the Statute to carry out the decisions in line with our
international obligations.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): First, I would like to
express our sincere appreciation to the President for
presiding over this important meeting, and to him and
to the Secretary-General for their introductory words,
as well as for the convening of the meeting.
At the outset, Slovakia aligns itself with the
statements delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union and by the representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility to
Protect, of which Slovakia is also a proud member.
Last year, Slovakia firmly supported the inclusion
of item 132, “Responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity”, on the Assembly’s
agenda at its seventy-second session. A formal debate,
the first since 2009, is clearly the appropriate forum for
discussions on the responsibility to protect. We hope
that today’s debate will not remain an exception in the
row of informal interactive dialogues, and we therefore
support the inclusion of the responsibility to protect as
a standing item on the Assembly’s agenda.
Slovakia greatly appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on the responsibility to protect
(A/72/884). We fully subscribe to the view that the
responsibility to protect forms an integral part of the
broader prevention agenda. On one hand, focusing on
the issue of implementing the responsibility to protect
can show the practical gains flowing from that concept
in specific situations. On the other hand, it is potentially

easier to reassure doubts about the concept in that way
than by having a general theoretical discussion.

2011 and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

The three pillars of the responsibility to protect
are interconnected and mutually reinforcing. No
one questions the primary responsibility of the State
to protect its own population from atrocity crimes.
However, assistance provided by the international
community — with the consent of the host State, and
preferably at its own request — can significantly aid the
efforts of individual Member States.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that we are
firmly convinced of the value of the full implementation
of the concept of the responsibility to protect. Only
sincere and effective action can safeguard the humanity
and dignity of the people of our planet for the future.

Building national capacities and resilient institutions
is not only essential for fulfilling national obligations to
prevent mass atrocities but also significantly contributes
to a better and more sustainable life for people. Good
governance, the rule of law and effective judicial and
security institutions are indispensable for thriving
societies that respect and guarantee the human rights
and freedoms of all individuals.
Slovakia has been actively engaged in many efforts
related to this particular agenda. As co-Chair of the
Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, we consider
that agenda to be closely linked to the responsibility to
protect, and the nexus is a very important component of
our wider efforts to build successful and just societies.
Security institutions are most likely to interfere with
the people’s rights. High-quality training, a strictly
rule-of-law-based approach and effective oversight
are indispensable for their correct performance of
their duties. Security-sector reform is also essential to
overall stabilization and reconstruction, especially in
transitional societies.
In spite of the efforts of the international community,
atrocity crimes, sadly enough, are still being committed.
That is the point where accountability mechanisms
become even more visible and essential. In that respect,
the role of the International Criminal Court, as an
independent and impartial judicial body prosecuting
situations where national jurisdictions are unable or
unwilling to address the issue of accountability, is
crucial. We call on all States Members of the United
Nations that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome
Statute and its amendments, and thereby help achieve
its universality. We also support other international
accountability mechanisms such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March

Mr. Hoshino (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President for convening this important
meeting. The Government of Japan welcomes the
holding of a formal debate on the responsibility to
protect in the General Assembly, the first on the
responsibility to protect since 2009, and we commend
Australia and Ghana for their leadership in that regard.
As the Secretary-General’s report (A/72/884)
correctly points out, the gap has grown. The primary
responsibility of States and the collective responsibility
of the international community to protect people
from mass atrocities are fully acknowledged today.
Nevertheless, civilians are increasingly trapped in
armed conflict. The increase in battle-related deaths
has been sharp and the number of people forcibly
displaced is larger than ever. I agree with the SecretaryGeneral that we should match our commitments to the
experience of vulnerable people on the ground, and I
want to highlight once again that prevention and early
action are key in the context of the responsibility
to protect.
In 2015, as the concept of responsibility to protect
became clearer, Japan decided to join the Global Network
of R2P Focal Points. For the past three years we have
been participating actively in discussions with relevant
Member States, the United Nations and civil society
with the aim of preventing mass atrocities. I believe that
now is the time for the international community to work
together to implement the responsibility to protect.
In the belief that Japan has an active role to play,
we have been mobilizing our official development
assistance for building the capacity of Member States
so as to assist national efforts in areas related to the
responsibility to protect, such as the rule of law, and
organizing various types of seminars for legal experts
and Government officials in Asia and Africa.
For example, for the past three years, Japan
has conducted a training course on criminal justice
for French-speaking African countries, with eight
francophone African countries participating, targeting

individuals working in the field of criminal justice. In
Viet Nam, we have been lending technical assistance
for more than 20 years. Such training courses and
assistance aim to improve criminal investigation
standards in the target countries, ensure the protection
of the human rights of suspects, improve the planning
and management of criminal justice-related institutions
and thereby contribute to strengthening capacities in
the area of the rule of law.
We strongly believe that the international
community’s collective action in linking development
assistance with the responsibility to protect will help
advance the implementation of prevention and early
action. Japan intends to further promote its support in
the areas that I just mentioned.
We also believe that the Security Council not only
has the primary responsibility for dealing with actual
conflicts but should also play a more active role in
preventing them. Unfortunately, however, we have
witnessed some cases where the Security Council failed
to fulfil its function to prevent or end mass atrocities,
owing to the use of the veto. In that connection, Japan
continues to support the initiative of France and Mexico
on the suspension of the veto in the case of mass
atrocities, as well as the code of conduct formulated by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.
Considering the reality of the increasing gap
between our commitment and what is happening on the
ground, it goes without saying that we should all redouble
our efforts to protect people from mass atrocities.
The international community has been discussing
the concept of the responsibility to protect since the
2005 World Summit. Its implementation requires our
continued commitment and collective efforts. Japan
supports the inclusion of the responsibility to protect as
a formal standing agenda item of the General Assembly
and is determined to collaborate with the international
community on this critical and very important issue.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): At the outset, I would
like to align myself with the statements made earlier
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
Denmark welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884).
For us, the responsibility to protect is a key principle,
building on existing international law, and we reaffirm
our commitment to the World Summit Outcome

document (resolution 60/1). The responsibility to protect
is a call for preventive action, and its three pillars are
of equal importance. The responsibility to protect is,
first and foremost, about the State protecting its entire
population against atrocity crimes.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the implementation of our responsibility
to protect is an important part of the wider prevention
agenda, which also includes the very vital Human
Rights Up Front initiative. We therefore welcome the
Secretary-General’s pledges to bring atrocity risks to
the attention of all relevant United Nations organs and
to encourage a more integrated approach to atrocity
prevention within the United Nations. We offer our full
support to the Secretary-General in that regard, and we
urge the swift appointment of a new Special Adviser on
the Responsibility to Protect. As we know, the Special
Adviser plays a key role in assisting Member States
in their work on implementing atrocity prevention,
and we would like to underscore that a new adviser
should ideally have practical experience with atrocity
prevention in a Member State context.
Denmark welcomes today’s opportunity to discuss
the implementation of our commitment to protect our
populations from atrocity crimes. This formal debate
allows us to exchange views, raise issues and highlight
good practices. That is fully in line with the 2005
World Summit Outcome document, which stressed
the importance of ensuring that the General Assembly
continues to consider the responsibility to protect. We
therefore support the call of the Secretary-General and
many other Member States today to make it a standing
item in the Assembly.
The responsibility to protect is primarily a
Member State commitment and this meeting should
therefore include reporting by Member States. How
do we all honour the solemn promise of “never again”,
as enshrined in the principle of the responsibility to
protect and the Genocide Convention? I would like
to report on some of the initiatives that Denmark has
recently undertaken to implement our commitment to
the responsibility to protect.
The preventive and universal nature of the
responsibility to protect makes it necessary for all of us
to apply it in a domestic context. With regard to the first
pillar, the Danish Government has initiated discussions
with our national human rights institution on how to
integrate the responsibility to protect into our national

human rights reporting. We also recently co-organized
the third global meeting of Global Action Against Mass
Atrocity Crimes. The meeting was generously hosted
by the Government of Uganda and convened more
than 40 Governments and regional and international
organizations, as well as a large number of civilsociety organizations. The focus of the meeting was
the strengthening of national architectures to prevent
atrocity crimes.
With regard to the second pillar, earlier this year
Denmark published an independent research report
on how to implement the responsibility to protect in
Danish foreign policy, focusing on human rights and
development cooperation. The report highlights a
number of concrete areas where we can do better in
order to prevent atrocity crimes and assist Member
States in preventing them. We are now working on
implementing key recommendations from the report,
and we would be happy to share its findings with other
Member States.
The Danish Government has also continued its
collaboration with other Governments in exercising their
responsibility to protect. We remain strongly committed
to fighting impunity for atrocity crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and others in
Iraq and Syria. We actively support the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, as well as civil society organizations engaged in
the collection of evidence to prosecute atrocity crimes.
Through our Special Representative for Freedom of
Religion or Belief, Denmark is also engaged in the
implementation of the Plan of Action for Religious
Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement to Violence
that Could Lead to Atrocity Crimes.
With regard to the third pillar, Denmark continues
to support the unanimous commitment made by
Member States in the World Summit Outcome
document. If Governments are manifestly unwilling
to protect their populations against atrocity crimes,
we share a responsibility to take collective action in a
timely and decisive manner. That means, for example,
the Security Council’s referral of relevant situations
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). Breaking
the cycle of impunity can be an important factor
in stopping ongoing and preventing future atrocity
crimes. The ICC can be a key asset when it comes to

implementing our responsibility to protect. Denmark
therefore supports referring the situation in Syria to the
ICC and considering the same step for other situations
where atrocity crimes are met with impunity.
All our efforts are linked to our national focal point
on the responsibility to protect. In our experience,
a national focal point is a key facilitator in engaging
different Government agencies in atrocity prevention,
as well as other stakeholders. Denmark is a proud
co-founder of the Global Network of R2P Focal Points,
as has been mentioned by others today. It is a vital forum
for States to collaborate on the implementation of the
responsibility to protect, and we encourage all Member
States to join the 60 Governments in the Network.
In conclusion, Denmark welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on the responsibility to protect.
Denmark fully supports the Secretary-General’s call
for redoubling our efforts, and we look forward to
continuing our close cooperation with the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect.
We are currently witnessing a number of situations in
which populations are enduring unimaginable atrocity
crimes. That shows that we all have to invest much more
to realize our responsibility to protect. It is our hope that
this debate and subsequent actions by Member States,
international organizations and civil society will help
to improve our record.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes this first formal debate of
the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect
and the report of the Secretary-General, entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884).
We support the statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect delivered by
the Ambassador of Qatar.
This debate provides an opportunity to emphasize
the need for a holistic focus that includes political,
economic and social measures of governance, as well
as legal and security measures, that make it possible
to design effective measures based on the concept
of the responsibility to protect that can be adopted
by the General Assembly, because universal values
are involved.
The paradigm shift in the United Nations and the
reform we are undertaking together with the SecretaryGeneral demand that we embrace our common goals

and develop mechanisms that make it possible to
achieve our goals in the best way possible.
Today, prevention, early warning and timely,
legitimate action that is in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations are the essential ways for us that
we can act on the responsibility to protect. Following the
adoption of the concept of sustainable peace and in the
light of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
we recognize that the United Nations should focus on
conflict prevention and address the roots of conflict,
instead of devoting a high percentage of its efforts to
responding to crisis situations. That means that we
must invest in communities and in inclusion in order to
ensure a healthy social fabric. There is no better conflict
prevention than ensuring sustainable development,
inclusion and respect for human rights and the rule of
law. That is the paradigm for the twenty-first century
on which we should concentrate all our efforts.
From that perspective, in 2016 Mexico promoted
the establishment of the Group of Friends of Sustainable
Peace, which now involves more than 40 countries and
of which we are the current Chair. That concept seeks to
consolidate the efforts of the international community
to maintain peace before, during and after conflicts, in
order to ensure that they are based on the three pillars
of the responsibility to protect in a strategic fashion that
is consistent with the Sustainable Development Goals
and the 2030 Agenda. If we want to be successful, our
actions must be focused not only on security, but also on
development, the fight against poverty and inequality,
inclusion and access to justice.
Mexico agrees with the Secretary-General when
he indicates in his report that the economic and
human costs are very high when we fail to adopt all
available measures to prevent mass atrocities. A
recent study carried out by the United Nations and the
World Bank concluded that during the past decade, the
international community spent more than $233 billion
on humanitarian responses. Had we invested more in
prevention than in response, the countries affected and
the international community as a whole would have
saved between $5 billion and $70 billion every year.
For every dollar spent on prevention, the international
community saves seven on crisis management.
The Secretary-General has also emphasized that
global and regional networks have become an integral
part of the institutional architecture to promote and
support States in implementing the responsibility to

protect and promoting international cooperation. I wish
to take this opportunity to say that beginning with the
eighth annual meeting of the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points for the responsibility to protect, which
was co-sponsored by my country and held in Helsinki
on 12 and 14 June, Mexico has a focal point in the
Global Network.
Early warning, preventive diplomacy and mediation
are intrinsic to the three pillars of the responsibility
to protect. Dialogue and the peaceful resolution of
conflicts are vital in order to consolidate international
cooperation, eradicate the underlying causes of
conflicts and promote development. The resident
coordinators and representatives of the United Nations
in each country have an objective and impartial goodfaith role to play in that regard.
Mexico is a member of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, promoted by Finland and Turkey, and we
believe it is essential to strengthening the role that
mediation plays in the peaceful settlement of disputes
and conflict prevention. Peace has a woman’s face. The
involvement of women in endeavours for sustainable
development and mediation and in weaving the healthy
social fabric that we all wish to see is evident. It is
urgent and essential. We trust that this debate will serve
to promote mediation as long as that tool continues to
be underutilized.
Finally, we cannot talk about the responsibility
to protect without mentioning accountability. We
continue to be concerned about the Security Council’s
inaction regarding the use of the veto in situations
related to the commission of mass atrocities. Inaction
and indifference to human suffering quite simply have
no place in multilateral diplomacy and should have no
place in the United Nations.
From that perspective, since 2014 Mexico and France
have promoted an initiative urging the five permanent
members of the Security Council to voluntarily abstain
from using their veto power in situations of mass
atrocity. Security Council reform should restrict the
use of the veto or, rather, include the responsibility
that involves refraining from the use of the veto when
dealing with situations involving mass atrocities. More
than 100 States, to which we are sincerely grateful,
have joined that French-Mexican initiative already,
and we urge those that have not yet done so to join.
Investigating and prosecuting mass atrocities provide

justice to victims and serve as a deterrent for preventing
such crimes from happening again.
On 17 July, we will commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. That is the date when the Court’s
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression came into
force. Mexico affirms its commitment to continuing to
strengthen the international criminal system in order
to ensure that the perpetrators of mass atrocities never
go unpunished.
In conclusion, Mexico calls resolutely for
strengthening multilateralism to help all of the
world’s people, for strengthening the United Nations
and the governance that we have established, and for
strengthening respect for international law and for
effective implementation of the legal jurisdiction of the
international courts and tribunals.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank and congratulate the
President on having organized this first formal debate
of the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect
since 2009.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement
taking stock of the current state of affairs with regard
to the responsibility to protect and shining a light on
the challenges facing the international community in
preventing genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.
My delegation also thanks the Secretary-General
for his report entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
early warning to early action” (A/72/884), which gives
particular attention to early warning and action and in
which the responsibility to protect is a key component
of that important process.
It is clear that the international community has
come a long way in the area of protection, whether
that has to do with peacekeeping, respecting and
promoting human rights, democracy and the rule of
law or preventing atrocities. However, the international
community in general, and our Organization in
particular, is still far from attaining the established
goals. If the responsibility to protect has garnered more
and more support in the international community in
recent years, the best way to implement the concept still
raises questions. How can we ensure protection while on
the one hand avoiding the uncontrolled implementation

of the responsibility to protect, and on the other the
political instrumentalization or exploitation of its noble
objectives? I want to outline my delegation’s views on
the following areas.
First, we want to recall the interlinkages among the
three pillars of the responsibility to protect and reiterate
that the third pillar falls primarily to States. However,
we must recognize that in conflict situations the
capacities of States can be insufficient or non-existent.
In those situations, the international community has
the responsibility to support them by strengthening
their capacities or providing the necessary means to
protect their people. That can be done, for instance, by
bolstering legal instruments and national institutions
and consolidating democracy and the primacy of
law. Capacity-building and technical assistance are
fundamental preventive measures that enable States
to reassert their national mechanisms for protecting
their people.
Secondly, States have to shoulder their
responsibilities to combat impunity, carry out
comprehensive inquiries and prosecute whoever is
responsible for committing mass atrocities in order
to prevent their recurrence. In that regard, national
accountability efforts must be encouraged and
supported, including by enhancing judicial cooperation
among States.
Thirdly, we want to encourage the various organs
of the United Nations system to better use the tools
available to them and to act decisively and in a timely way
to prevent mass atrocities and strengthen international
responsibilities. Moreover, important mechanisms
such as the Universal Periodic Review of the Human
Rights Council can support prevention efforts, and
we encourage States Members of the United Nations
to make better use of the Universal Periodic Review
process as a preventive mechanism. Furthermore, more
sustained guidance from the Human Rights Council
on the prevention of mass atrocities through the use of
those various mechanisms will certainly reinforce the
ability of the international community to combat such
heinous crimes. The Human Rights Up Front initiative
is also a relevant tool available to the United Nations
in the prevention and detection of situations that could
degenerate into conflict or give rise to mass atrocities.
Lastly, we pay tribute to the important role that
national and international civil society can play in
support of the promotion and implementation of the

responsibility to protect. Effective prevention requires
the active participation of civil society, the private
sector, religious leaders and individuals. In that regard,
my delegation would like to recall the Fez Process,
the first Forum on the Role of Religious Leaders in
Preventing Incitement that Could Lead to Atrocity
Crimes, which was held in Fez on 24 and 25 April 2015
and was devoted to engaging with religious leaders
and spiritual actors to develop strategies to prevent
incitement that can lead to atrocity crimes.

The Kingdom of Morocco shares the SecretaryGeneral’s firm conviction that the responsibility to
protect can be attained only by consolidating democracy
and the rule of law, as well as by implementing the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. Morocco supports the
Secretary-General in all his efforts to promote the
concept of the responsibility to protect.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

