Seventy-second session

100th plenary meeting

Monday, 25 June 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Llorentty Solíz
(Plurinational State of Bolivia), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/884)
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): For Germany, the
responsibility to protect is of special importance. It is
a priority for us and I am therefore very pleased that
we have the opportunity to speak first this afternoon.
I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening today’s debate, and to pay
tribute to Australia and Ghana, which have been the
driving force behind this topic and putting it on our
agenda. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/72/884) and for his inspiring speech
this morning (see A/72/PV.99). Much has been said
about the responsibility to protect, and I will therefore
be brief and make just six short points.
I would first like to align myself with the statements
made this morning by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Qatar (see A/72/
PV.99), who spoke on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect, of which we are a member.

Secondly, many of this morning’s speakers
discussed conflict prevention, and I listened very
carefully, for instance, to the former President of
Kiribati, who highlighted the issue (see A/72/PV.99). I
think that it is key to the debate on the responsibility to
protect. In other words, we must ensure that we go from
early warning to early action. For Germany that is a
key aspect of the responsibility to protect, and we have
therefore been prioritizing it at the United Nations. We
also believe that the Security Council should feature
conflict prevention on its agenda far more often than
it does, and when Germany assumes its seat on the
Council, starting on 1 January 2019, we will have
conflict prevention on our agenda too.
Thirdly, within the family of the United Nations,
the offices that deal with conflict prevention must
assume a more important role, and we have to pay more
attention to this. For us, the United Nations Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
is key in that regard, but in the broader sense of conflict
prevention so are the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund. All these institutions are crucial to promoting
conflict prevention and deserve our support. In that
context, I would also like to highlight and once again
commend the President of the Assembly, who has
put conflict prevention and, in particular, sustaining
peace — where conflict prevention plays a very
important role — on the agenda during this session.
That has been one of the most important efforts of
his presidency.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

Many speakers have emphasized my fourth
point, which is that the primary responsibility for the
responsibility to protect lies with Member States. In
his statement this morning, the Secretary-General said
that the principle’s first pillar refers to the primary
responsibility of States to protect all populations
within their territory from atrocity crimes. If a
country is to assume that responsibility, it must build
resilience — resilience against violations of human
rights and against mass atrocities and ethnic cleansing.
In that regard, I would like to cite my colleague from
Ghana, one of the founding members of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, who insisted
that in order to build resilience we need functional
institutions of good governance at all levels (see A/72/
PV.99). That includes a robust human rights regime,
inclusiveness and respect for diversity and the rule of
law, with a strong judiciary.
Fifthly, to return to inclusiveness, for that, civil
society must play a strong role. It has the closest links
to the people. The members of civil society know what
is happening in their country and they may also be in a
position to give the earliest indications when something
is going wrong. To refer once again to my colleague
from Ghana, she said that collaboration with civil
society as a strategic partner in the implementation
of the responsibility to protect is very important to
her country. I therefore think that the debates that we
are having on the responsibility to protect here at the
United Nations would also benefit from the inclusion
of representatives of civil society, if possible, and I
would like to make a general appeal to that effect to
the Secretary-General, as well as to all the various
agencies and offices. This week we are holding a highlevel conference of heads of counter-terrorism agencies
on 28 June, but unfortunately here at the United
Nations civil-society organizations were excluded from
that discussion.
With regard to my last point, which is about
accountability, if we are to prevent mass atrocities,
mechanisms for accountability must be in place. We
have to ensure that we establish an environment in
which no one who commits a crime against humanity
or mass atrocities can even think about going free. Such
people must feel that they will have to constantly be
looking over their shoulders for the rest of their lives,
and they must fear being caught. I would therefore
like to take this opportunity to plead for support and
cooperation with the International, Impartial and

Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. If
prevention fails in Syria or Myanmar, as we have seen,
we need accountability.
I thank the President of the General Assembly once
again for putting this item on the agenda.
Ms. Núñez Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement (see A/72/PV.99) on an issue
that is so important to the international community. I
would also like to express my country’s appreciation
for the leadership role that Australia and Ghana
have undertaken, which has proved invaluable in
incorporating the responsibility to protect into this
session of the General Assembly, and to say that we
hope to see the issue become a permanent item on
its agenda.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group
of Friends for the Responsibility to Protect (see A/72/
PV.99), and I would also like to make some comments
on issues of importance for us.
Uruguay once again affirms its firm commitment
to the responsibility to protect. In that regard, we want
to highlight its first and second pillars, on prevention,
in the understanding that force should only ever be
used as a last resort and should always comply with
all the assurances enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations, including the express consent of the
Security Council. We therefore advocate a preventive,
comprehensive and holistic approach and welcome
the Secretary-General’s most recent report, entitled
“The responsibility to protect: from early warning to
early action” (A/72/884), in which he stresses that the
effective prevention of atrocity crimes must be placed
in a broader context of the international community’s
efforts to prevent crises and suffering.
States are primarily responsible for protecting their
peoples and for ensuring that human rights are respected
within their borders. They must also ensure that the
perpetrators of such heinous crimes are investigated,
held accountable and prosecuted. Accountability is
important not only in combating impunity and injustice
but also in functioning as a deterrent. In that belief,
Uruguay was the first country in Latin America to
fully implement the Rome Statute of the International

Criminal Court in its domestic legislation and therefore
appeals to all States that have not yet done so to become
party to the Statute and cooperate fully with the Court.
I would also like to underscore that the prevention of
atrocities is most effective when national, regional and
global actors work in a coordinated and cooperative
manner. Uruguay is a member of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect and is part of the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points, as well as the Latin
American Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity
Prevention. These initiatives strengthen national and
regional preventive capacities and help us to foster
confidence-building among States.
I should also highlight the importance of
international, regional and subregional organizations
in conflict prevention, in addition to the role of
peacekeeping operations as an effective tool in
preventing atrocity crimes. Peacekeeping operations
help to prevent or mitigate abuses by States or rebel
groups and are effective early-warning instruments for
possible violations of human rights and other crimes.
As a troop-contributing country, Uruguay adheres to
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
and therefore supports the importance of conducting
predeployment training programmes on the effective
protection of civilians so that contingents are properly
equipped before being deployed in the field.
It is especially important to ensure that the Security
Council, which according to the Charter bears the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, spares no effort and provides effective
measures to protect the civilian population, including
by referring cases to the International Criminal Court
when appropriate. As a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, Uruguay supports
its code of conduct for Council resolutions relating to
the protection of populations against genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,
and we urge States that have not yet done so to join
that initiative. We also support France and Mexico’s
proposed political declaration on the suspension of the
veto powers of the permanent members of the Security
Council in cases of mass atrocity.
In conclusion, the effective implementation of the
responsibility to protect requires a complementary
approach, including concerted action among States,
cooperation with the Security Council, the Human
Rights Council, the International Criminal Court and
the various United Nations agencies and collaboration

with global and regional organizations, as well as
civil society. I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Global Centre for the Responsibility to
Protect and the other non-governmental organizations
that work valiantly to ensure that the principles of the
responsibility to protect and the protection of human
rights are implemented.
The reality of the twenty-first century has shown
us a world convulsed by violations of the most basic
human rights perpetrated by both armed groups and
States. These are crimes that are carried out in total
contempt for human life. Only concerted efforts on the
part of all actors can enable us to continue strengthening
the consensus on the responsibility to protect and bring
relief to the millions of innocent human beings who
are suffering.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation has considered the
Secretary-General’s report contained in document
A/72/884. We reaffirm that no Member State can reject
or contest in principle some of the report’s contents
about the basic responsibility of States to protect their
citizens, and about promoting the systems related to
early warning and early action aimed at preventing
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. However, there are reasons for
concern that have been expressed by several Member
States, specifically about the fact that some Member
States, in coordination with members of the Secretariat,
have taken an unprofessional and exclusionary approach
in order to exploit the responsibility to protect and
politicize it in a way that makes it subject to controversy
in the work of the United Nations.
We are not here today to make a political statement
or teach anyone a lesson, but we intend to speak
transparently and clearly about the realities, events,
disastrous consequences and grave crimes that the
Governments of certain States have perpetrated,
violating principles of international law and
unilaterally exploiting the concept of the responsibility
to protect without a United Nations mandate and so as
to interfere in the affairs of some States, selectively
and unjustifiably.
As a founding and responsible member of this
Organization, the Syrian Arab Republic would like
to remind all Member States that one of the reports
of former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon clearly
mentioned the serious concerns raised by the issue

of some Governments’ misuse of the concept of the
responsibility to protect and their application of it to
a particular State. Needless to say, for the past eight
years that State, which is a member of our international
Organization, has been enduring a disastrous situation.
As a result, we have seen destruction, chaos and the
deaths of thousands of its innocent citizens thanks to
military operations and aerial bombardments by the
armies of Governments that claim to be applying the
concept of the responsibility to protect by perpetrating
acts of murder, destruction and looting. Need we also
add that this same State has been enduring a terrifying
situation involving terrorism, fighting and struggles
for power. Tens of thousands of its citizens, as well as
the citizens of States in Africa, have lost their lives in
their attempt to escape the scourge of war, drowning
in the Mediterranean Sea. What kind of responsibility
to protect is it when thousands are killed, States are
destroyed and their peoples displaced under its pretext?
The preparers of the Secretary-General’s latest
report insist on flagrantly ignoring the fact that the
criteria and assurances that Member States apply in
implementing the concept of the responsibility to protect
differ greatly. They also ignore the objective criticisms
that many Member States have made about the lack
of assurances and restrictions that can ensure that the
responsibility to protect is not used as a justification
for violating States’ sovereignty and interfering in their
internal affairs, which, as we all know, have occurred
in numerous places.
The Secretariat and some Member States are still
trying to use the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
to create a fictional legal basis for the responsibility
to protect. In that regard, my country and many other
Member States believe that paragraphs 138 and 139 of
resolution 60/1 do not establish the responsibility to
protect as a principle. Rather, they underscore basic and
inherent principles behind the purposes of the United
Nations relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the resolve to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, to have faith in
fundamental human rights and the dignity of human
beings, to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom, and above all to respect the
sovereignty of States and refrain from interfering
in their internal affairs. What does all of this mean?
It means that the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter are above the concept of the
responsibility to protect, especially since the concept

itself is a controversial one and has not yet been adopted
as such by Member States.
Syria, together with many other Member States,
calls on the Secretariat and the Governments of States
that are striving to establish this principle as a standing
item on the General Assembly agenda to show courage
and admit that Member States differ substantially on
this concept. They must have a transparent discussion
of the genuine sources of concerns about it and admit
that the United Nations has been unable to undertake
its real responsibility to protect the Palestinian people
from the Israeli occupation and its supporters. They
must recognize that the United Nations has shown
itself unable to implement an early-warning system for
protecting Iraqis and Syrians from the acts of Da’esh,
the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations.
They must acknowledge that the United Nations has
failed to create international systems for early alerts
and cooperation in order to confront the aspect of
international terrorism known as foreign terrorist
fighters, which some Governments and intelligence
services have helped to create.
They must also recognize that the United Nations has
been unable to undertake its responsibility to protect by
addressing the crimes of the illegitimate United Statesled international coalition against the Syrian people.
According to United Nations reports, those crimes have
destroyed the cities of Raqqa and Ayn Al-Arab. They
have killed thousands of civilians in Syria and they say
that all of that is collateral damage — that destroying
cities, killing thousands and looting monuments are
collateral damage. Infrastructure, bridges and electric
and hydro-power plants have all been destroyed as a
result of collateral damage on the pretext of fighting
terrorism. When the Secretariat and the Governments
of the States that promote the responsibility to protect
in this exclusionary and selective way admit that
these consequences are part of a failure on the part
of the United Nations to respect and implement every
one of the principles and provisions of the Charter,
without exception, then we in Syria, along with many
other Member States that stand ready to respect the
principles of freedom, justice and equality in word and
deed, are ready to sit down with them at one table and
discuss the concept of the responsibility to protect in a
transparent way.
At that point, we will be willing to discuss the issue
of including this concept on the General Assembly
agenda and to reach a consensus on the concept itself, as

well as on its content and the assurances that can ensure
that it is not used for political objectives that run counter
to the principles and purposes of the United Nations
and its Charter. Without that, we would be dealing with
a bad situation marked by the political hypocrisy and
immorality that have undermined the credibility of this
international Organization ever since the invasion of
Iraq. We would also be dealing with parties that are
unwilling to defend human rights anywhere in the
world, because they are using humanitarian issues to
justify their intrusions into the affairs of other States
and disguise their military aggressions against them as
legitimate actions.
Speaking of political hypocrisy and immorality,
and in response to certain delegations regarding the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, I would say that
we cannot separate legal responsibility and moral
principles, since otherwise they would be characterized
as hypocritical. I would also say that anything built on
falsehood is false. In that regard, I would like to remind
the Assembly that this illegal Mechanism was based
on General Assembly resolution 71/248, which was not
adopted by consensus and was the outcome of an illegal
operation and procedure in which the Assembly went
beyond its mandate. The resolution blatantly infringes
on the purview and mandates of the Security Council,
as outlined in Article 12 of the Charter, and the General
Assembly has therefore created an illegal mechanism
and granted it investigative powers that it does not
itself possess.
My delegation and some other Member States
have sent several letters to the Secretary-General and
to representatives of the Member States in which we
have proved beyond any discussion or doubt that this
Mechanism is illegal. It was born dead and will stay
that way.
I would ask my colleagues to always remember that
the Government behind this illegitimate Mechanism is
the Government of a country — I am not using the word
“regime”, because it would be shameful for a diplomat
to use that under the dome of the United Nations, the
dome of international legitimacy — whose previous
Prime Minister declared publicly that the ruling family
in his country supports and finances the Al-Nusra
Front, which is classified as a terrorist organization

by the Security Council. The Government of another
country also launders money through illegal operations
carried out by its financial institutions, selling oil and
gas and then financing armed terrorist groups in my
country, Syria.
Given all of this, do member States think that
supporting this Mechanism can be considered a moral
action? Some members here in this Hall should be their
own judges with regard to the use of double standards
and selectivity. There is no need to remind them that
they are failing to fight terrorism and are deliberately
turning a blind eye to the flow of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters to Syria.
In conclusion, I want to remind the Assembly that
for an entire year the Security Council was unable
to include a terrorist entity called Hay’at Tahrir
Al-Sham — the Organization for the Liberation of the
Levant — on the list of terrorist organizations. Why?
Because the United States delegation was against that.
On the sidelines of a review of the United Nations
counter-terrorism strategy, during the informal
meetings that took place a few days ago, that same
delegation, that is, the American delegation, rejected
the inclusion of any reference in the text of any draft
resolution to be adopted by the General Assembly to
fighting the promotion of violent extremism on Internet
networks. Why? The justification was that this goes
against freedom of expression. Fighting the spread
of extremism and terrorism on Internet networks is
contradictory, in their opinion, to freedom of expression
and speech.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the President for having convened this
formal debate on the responsibility to protect, which is
a priority for Peru. We are also particularly grateful for
the Secretary-General’s report in this regard (A/72/884).
This formal debate comes after nine years
of informal interactive dialogue and represents a
further step towards the consolidation of a principle
that is inherent in the promotion and protection of
human rights and closely linked to the obligations
undertaken by the Peruvian Government. We reaffirm
our commitment to the principle of its three pillars,
starting with the recognition of the fact that the
responsibility to protect falls primarily on States, with
the objective of strengthening rather than undermining
their sovereignty.

Peru is committed to international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We are party
to the key international instruments in both areas,
whose provisions are duly reflected, developed and
implemented in our domestic legislation. In this
connection, during our current term in the Security
Council, we are according a high priority to its
responsibility to protect civilians in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We feel compelled to
express our deep regret and concern about the impunity
with which international humanitarian law is being
violated today, in many cases without the Security
Council living up to its responsibilities.
We want to emphasize, therefore, that it is the moral
and legal obligation of the members of the Council to act
with unity to put an end to the suffering that for various
reasons afflicts millions of people in countries such as
Yemen, Syria, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Myanmar, Somalia, the Central African
Republic, Libya and Palestine. In that connection, we
want to underscore that 116 States, including Peru, have
signed a code of conduct that commits us to act in a
timely and decisive manner to prevent and put an end
to atrocity crimes.
Here we reiterate that the sovereignty of each
State should be understood to include the primary
responsibility for the protection of its population
and that, in line with the Charter of the United
Nations, when national authorities fail to protect
their populations, the international community must
shoulder that responsibility.
Peru also highlights the fact that a number of
peacekeeping operations deployed by decision of the
Security Council have mandates to protect civilians,
including ones in which Peru’s own army is involved.
However, all States must abide by international
humanitarian law and train their armed forces to that
end. Peru has adopted various initiatives in this regard,
reflected in the impeccable performance of our troops
deployed in several peacekeeping operations.

early-warning mechanisms and achieve a rapid
transition to early action. It is important to strengthen
existing preventive capacities and promote mechanisms
for genuine accountability. Among other things, this
implies full respect for the rule of law at the national
and international levels. It is therefore essential to
address the root causes of conflicts and ensure that
human rights are upheld. To that end, it is equally vital
to ensure accountability for the commission of atrocity
crimes, and here the International Criminal Court plays
a vital role. We therefore encourage all States to accede
to the Rome Statute and cooperate with the Court. We
also urge the Security Council to refer atrocity cases
to the Court in situations where it is necessary to
guarantee access to justice and prevent impunity.
We would like to conclude by reiterating Peru’s
commitment to the responsibility to protect and by
expressing our gratitude to the Special Advisers to the
Secretary-General for their outstanding work.
Mrs. Cupellini (Italy): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General for their statements and
for the advocacy on the responsibility to protect that
the Secretary-General continues to provide, including
through his annual reports. I would also like to
congratulate Australia and Ghana for having made
today’s formal debate possible.
Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/72/
PV.99), which we have the honour of co-chairing this
year, together with Qatar. I would like to make a few
additional remarks in my national capacity.

We emphasize that the most effective way to protect
is through prevention. In this regard, we underscore the
importance of understanding that sustainable peace is a
lasting objective, focused on human beings and on the
institutions and processes required to prevent or resolve
violent conflicts.

The growing number of attacks on civilians, schools,
hospitals, humanitarian workers and peacekeepers; the
forced displacement of millions of people and today’s
unprecedented refugee crisis; and the widespread and
systematic use of sexual and gender-based violence
as a deliberate strategy by State and non-State actors
are stark reminders of the fact that we need to close
the gap between our commitment to the principle of
the responsibility to protect and our actions. Mass
atrocities can and must be prevented. In 2005, we made
a commitment: early-warning mechanisms exist, and it
is now time for action.

Here we also want to highlight the SecretaryGeneral’s report, which focuses on how to improve

The responsibility to protect lies primarily with
national authorities and should therefore start at home

and inform our policy decisions at both the national
and international levels. In this regard, I would like to
highlight three concrete examples of Italy’s endeavours.
First, as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council in 2017, Italy spared no effort in pursuing the
core objective of the Council and, ultimately, of the
United Nations, that is, the protection of civilians. We
promoted a more systematic handling of cross-cutting
issues and transnational threats on the part of the
Security Council in the light of their repercussions for
international peace. We highlighted the importance of
implementing a holistic approach that combines security,
development and the protection of human rights.
In this regard, I would like to recall the briefings
on the issues of refugees and the threats to the stability
of the Mediterranean posed by terrorism, organized
crime, migration and human trafficking; the adoption
of resolution 2347 (2017), on the impact on international
peace and security of the destruction of cultural heritage
as a way of destroying national identities; the adoption
of resolution 2388 (2017), on trafficking, with its
victim-centred approach; and the adoption of resolution
2382 (2017), aimed at strengthening the role of United
Nations police in protecting civilians, including by
providing assistance and support to local authorities.
We encourage the members of the Security Council
to continue to hold regular debates on the threat of
atrocity crimes so as to strengthen the Council’s role
in prevention, including through briefings by the
Secretary-General’s Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and civilsociety representatives.
Secondly, in January we launched the
Responsibility to Protect in Schools project, which
we developed together with the Netherlands as a
concrete way of delivering on our mandate in the
Security Council and in order to raise awareness of
the importance of protecting fundamental rights and
freedoms and establishing international principles for
the prevention of mass atrocities. In this role-playing
game, students are faced with a fictitious but realistic
scenario in which the civilian population is exposed
to mass atrocities and crimes. Through the game, they
also become aware of the complex dynamics that occur
in real life, such as a Government that systematically
violates the rights of part of its population; the inability
of the United Nations to intervene because it has not

been authorized to do so by the Security Council; the
specific interests of some countries; and the crucial
role played by civil society and the media in raising
awareness of the tragic situation through the news,
detailed reporting and, above all, images. We will
promote the project in additional Italian schools and
start collaborating with other Governments to replicate
the course internationally.
Thirdly, Italy, as the Western country contributing
the most troops to peacekeeping operations,
immediately endorsed the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians. We invite other member States
to do the same. We believe that the effective protection
of civilians requires properly trained troops, adequate
equipment and a strong political commitment. Italy
will continue to do its part, redoubling its efforts in
providing training and offering capacity-building
to military, police and judicial officers from all over
the world.
Since 2005, through the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Police Units in Vicenza, we have trained more
than 10,000 police personnel units, many of which are
deployed in peacekeeping operations in Africa. Our
personnel are regularly trained in the areas of human
rights, sexual and gender-based violence, the protection
of children in armed conflict and the responsibility to
protect. Last year we joined the Circle of Leadership on
preventing and responding to sexual exploitation and
abuse, launched by the Secretary-General, to heighten
the commitment to preventing and prosecuting cases
of sexual exploitation and abuse, including among our
military personnel.
Against that backdrop, we truly believe that with the
simple measures that are available, we can effectively
implement the responsibility to protect. There is no
excuse. In this regard, we believe that there is added
value in including that responsibility as a standing
item on the agenda of the General Assembly so as to
allow the United Nations membership to properly and
formally debate the issue, share best practices and
discuss our differing opinions on the subject.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
today’s first formal debate in the General Assembly on
the responsibility to protect, and we align ourselves with
the statement delivered by the representative of Qatar
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect (see A/72/PV.99).

Despite the increasing number of occasions on
which the norm of the responsibility to protect is
referenced in United Nations resolutions and debates,
the actual gap between our expressed commitment to
protect civilian populations and our collective action
to do so in crises has widened. Thirteen years after the
2005 World Summit, it is high time to take that norm
from the realm of the conceptual to concrete action.
The primary responsibility of each State to protect
its population from crimes against humanity, war
crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing is not contested.
In adopting the norm of the responsibility to protect, we
have also collectively agreed on our joint responsibility
in the event that individual Governments are either
unable or unwilling to fulfil this task.
The norm of the responsibility to protect provides
for a wide range of measures, from diplomatic
engagement to more robust enforcement measures. The
Security Council, as the guardian of international peace
and security, is given a special role to that end. In many
situations involving mass atrocity crimes, however, the
Council is paralysed owing to the use or threat of use of
the veto. The steadily increasing number of supporters
of the Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency
group code of conduct — 117 States at present — is an
expression of the collective expectation of the States
Members of the United Nations.
Council membership comes with responsibilities
and a stated commitment to taking action to end or,
ideally, prevent atrocity crimes. The 117 States that
have joined the code of conduct have committed to
supporting timely and decisive action to this end and to
refraining from voting against credible draft resolutions
before the Council that pursue this goal. In our view, the
code of conduct is a baseline that all States running for
Security Council membership should be able to meet.
We invite all States that have not yet done so to join and
work for the application of the code.
It is disappointing that the political consensus around
the norm of the responsibility to protect, 13 years after
we agreed on it unanimously, remains fragile. This is
due in no small part to misrepresentation of the norm
with respect to the use of force. The norm is frequently
misconstrued as an attempt to bypass the Charter of
the United Nations and to justify military action that
has not been authorized by the Security Council. This
is a mistake, because it harms not only the norm but
also our international legal order. The responsibility to

protect does not alter the prohibition on the illegal use
of force under the Charter of the United Nations, one of
the most important building blocks of the international
order; rather, it spells out clearly that military action is
possible as a last resort and only when authorized by
the Council under Chapter VII.
If the norm of the responsibility to protect is
positioned squarely within the framework of the
existing regime with respect to the use of force, there
will soon be an additional tool for the Council to be
more effective in playing its enforcement role regarding
the use of force. On 17 July the International Criminal
Court (ICC) will commence its exercise of jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression, the most serious form of
the illegal use of force.
In addition to the established prohibition of the
illegal use of force under the Charter of the United
Nations, the ICC will, in a complementary manner,
offer the avenue of individual criminal responsibility
for those in breach of this prohibition. We hope
that a significant number of States will join the
35 States parties that have already ratified the Kampala
amendments on the crime of aggression, governing the
Court’s jurisdiction in this respect.
We also hope that the Council will avail itself of
this new tool in its work to regulate the legality of
the use of force in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
In addition to this new function, the International
Criminal Court will continue playing a direct, effective
role with respect to the issue we are considering today.
Ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes is an
essential element in preventing their recurrence. Despite
its obvious limitations, in the absence of universality of
the Rome Statute, and with the Security Council being
at best a reluctant enforcer of accountability, the ICC
remains the centrepiece of the fight against impunity
for such crimes and deserves our continued support.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and the President
of the General Assembly for convening and supporting
this crucial formal debate, which offers an excellent
opportunity to renew and enhance our pledge to build
a stronger global partnership for the prevention of
genocide. We want to thank Australia and Ghana for
having pushed so hard to put it on the agenda here in
the General Assembly.

We share the growing concerns of the SecretaryGeneral about the increase in the number of victims
of atrocity crimes. That is why we have to strengthen
the response of the United Nations by implementing
specific measures to improve internal United Nations
coordination in the area of the responsibility to protect.
Hungary strongly supports the work of the Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and the
Secretary-General’s decision to appoint a new Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. It is more
important than ever to ensure that States place more
emphasis on prevention through various measures,
including early-warning systems, political mediation,
empowering the victims of crimes, enhancing domestic
and international capacities for ending impunity and
finding new ways to ensure more effective compliance
with international humanitarian law.
As an active member of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, Hungary is fully dedicated
to raising awareness on the issue at the national and
international levels. We support the work of the
Budapest Centre for the International Prevention of
Genocide and Mass Atrocities, which among other
things will host a workshop on the prevention of
radicalization in practice, aimed at raising awareness in
the security sector in Hungary on the challenges posed
by polarization and radicalization.
In order to enhance the visibility of international
human rights mechanisms and to provide a platform for
international dialogue on current human rights issues,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of Hungary
has organized the annual Budapest Human Rights
Forum for 10 years now, bringing together national
and international human rights experts as well as
representatives of non-governmental and governmental
organizations and academia.
In the field of crime prevention, for example, we
adopted a national crime prevention strategy for the
period from 2013 to 2023. We provide various training
programmes for professionals working with young
people, including mediation training to handle conflict
in schools. With regard to human rights, in 2012 the
Government established a human rights working group
with the purpose of monitoring respect for human rights
in Hungary in compliance with the recommendations of
the Human Rights Council and the Working Group on
the Universal Periodic Review.

We believe, of course, that action should be taken
not only at the national but also the international level.
We therefore support the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. Hungary has always been an active member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group, supporting efforts to make the Security Council
more efficient, inclusive and legitimate. We advocate
for refraining voluntarily from the use of the veto in
case of mass atrocities, and we encourage all member
States that have not yet done so to sign the code of
conduct formulated by the ACT group to strengthen
cooperation within the United Nations framework.
The role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) is
also vital to ending impunity and bringing perpetrators
to justice when national criminal accountability
mechanisms are not available. That is why we stand by
the ICC and have pledged our full support to the values
it defends.
Our eventual goal, of course, should be to ensure
peaceful and secure living conditions for all in their
homelands, free from the possibility of falling victim
to atrocity crimes. However, this can be achieved only
by tackling the root causes of conflict, as well as by
dealing with transnational threats such as violent
extremism, terrorism, human trafficking, modern-day
slavery, climate change and water scarcity as part of
our broader prevention efforts.
Mrs. Chatardova (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statements made earlier
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/72/PV.99).
I thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his valuable report (A/72/884), whose conclusions we
broadly share. As a member of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect, the Czech Republic
remains fully committed to that responsibility. We
call for the full and consistent implementation of all
three pillars in line with paragraphs 138 and 139 of the
2005 World Summit Outcome document (resolution
60/1). The Czech Republic stresses the importance
of prioritizing and meaningfully investing in the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity.

I would like to thank Finland and Mexico for
having recently convened the eighth annual meeting
of the Global Network of R2P Focal Points, as well
as the Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect
for its hard work. In line with the Secretary-General’s
report, we encourage all Member States to appoint their
national responsibility-to-protect focal points and join
the growing global network.
All Member States must uphold their obligations
under international human rights law and humanitarian
and refugee law, which underpin our commitment to
the responsibility to protect. We condemn the growing
number of deliberate attacks on civilians, humanitarian
workers, journalists, peacekeepers, hospitals, schools,
places of worship and cultural sites.
The Czech Republic stresses the need for the
Security Council to act effectively and consistently
when faced with mass atrocity situations. In that regard,
we welcome the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group regarding Security
Council action against genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and the French and Mexican
initiative on voluntary restraint on the use of the veto by
the permanent members of the Security Council, aimed
at supporting timely and decisive action by the Security
Council to prevent atrocities. Ensuring accountability
for mass atrocity crimes is one of the best ways to prevent
them from recurring. National accountability efforts
should be strengthened, as States have the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes
committed within their jurisdiction. The International
Criminal Court remains the most important institution
in the struggle to end impunity for genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The Czech Republic
continues to support the Court and provides financial
support for the accountability mechanisms established
by the United Nations, including the Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, established
under resolution 71/248.
The Czech Republic is concerned about the fact
that sexual and gender-based violence is increasingly
employed as a deliberate strategy by State and
non-State perpetrators. We remain determined to help
combat sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
and post-conflict countries. In partnership with
non-governmental organizations, the Czech Republic

implements projects aimed at preventing sexual
violence and abuse of women and girls, including
through setting up centres for marginalized and abused
girls, as well as by providing for the health care and
hygienic needs of internally displaced persons in Syria,
Lebanon, Yemen, Libya, South Sudan, Iraq, Pakistan,
Jordan and Bangladesh.
As a candidate country for the Human Rights
Council, the Czech Republic remains committed to the
responsibility to protect. We encourage the preventive
role of the Human Rights Council, in accordance
with its mandate. We stress the important role that
Geneva-based institutions and mechanisms such as
the Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
mandate-holders can play in preventing and responding
to mass atrocity crimes, as well as the importance of
regular Security Council briefings on mass atrocity
situations by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
I would like to assure members that the Czech
Republic is ready to explore all possible ways of
translating the concept of the responsibility to protect
into concrete action.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the inclusion of this important
debate on the responsibility to protect on the agenda
of the seventy-second session of the General Assembly.
Genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
are the most serious crimes under public international
law, which obliges all States — whether or not they
are directly party to a conflict — to take all necessary
measures to prevent such crimes, end those under way,
bring their perpetrators to justice and prevent their
recurrence. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, it is fitting to recall the fundamental role played
by this institution in the fight against impunity. We
encourage all States to cooperate with the Court and
support it so that it can continue to fulfil its vital role in
the prevention of serious crimes.
We commemorated World Refugee Day only a
few days ago. To grasp the gravity of the situation,
one has only to look at the unprecedented number of
68.5 million displaced persons throughout the world,
the great majority of whom have been displaced
owing to conflict. Discussions on the responsibility
to protect continue to be essential, and the debate on
this issue should be set up within an institutionalized

framework and take place on a regular basis. With
regard to such institutionalized frameworks, we
underscore the importance of the United Nations
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility
to Protect and its Special Advisers, whose cooperation
has been invaluable to Switzerland in the context of its
commitment to the prevention of atrocities, not only
in the framework of the Global Action against Mass
Atrocity Crimes but in others as well.
Switzerland is convinced that effective prevention
requires addressing the root causes of conflicts.
In that regard, we especially welcome the process
of reflection on the system of protection of human
rights, in particular on the role of the Human Rights
Council. We call on all States to cooperate with that
essential body. More attention needs to be given to the
preventive potential of the Human Rights Council, and
together with a group of States we therefore introduced
a draft resolution during the current session under
way in Geneva. Moreover, the three pillars of the
United Nations must be brought closer together so that
real progress can be made in preventing violence and
human suffering, which dovetails with the prevention
vision that the Secretary-General has elaborated on
many times.
The goal of moving from early warning to early
action can be achieved only if the Security Council
more frequently and effectively avails itself of the
preventive role that the Charter of the United Nations
confers on it. In that context, the Council should make
greater use of the potential offered by existing formal
and informal mechanisms.
In conclusion, Switzerland would also like to
point to the vital role that civil society can play in the
prevention of atrocities, not only as a voice condemning
violations but as an entity possessing expertise in a
specific area that has not yet been fully developed or
implemented at the national level.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba is grateful to the President of
the General Assembly for his good offices in convening
this meeting and for the efforts of the Secretary-General
in preparing his latest report on the responsibility to
protect (A/72/884).
Cuba has repeatedly stated that the issue of the
responsibility to protect continues to present serious
concerns for many countries, particularly small and
developing States, owing to the lack of consensus on

various elements of the concept and their identification,
which can be easily manipulated for political
purposes. It is a fallacy to speak of the principle of
the responsibility to protect. Such a responsibility is
not a principle but a concept whose characteristics,
rules of implementation and assessment mechanisms
are far from being established and agreed. In that
regard, it is inappropriate to speak of strengthening the
implementation of the responsibility to protect in the
absence of a consensus on its scope and implications
that would resolve diverging interpretations, ensure
its universal recognition and acceptance and confer
legitimacy on proposed action for its implementation.
It is fitting to underscore the fact that the
international understanding on the responsibility to
protect is circumscribed by paragraphs 138 and 139 of
resolution 60/1, where the concept is restricted to cases
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, and which state that the duty of the
international community is to encourage and assist
States in exercising that responsibility, as appropriate.
The term “atrocity crimes” is not part of that
understanding and should therefore not be used to
refer to the four cases mentioned in paragraphs 138
and 139. My delegation is concerned that the terms
“atrocity crimes” or “mass atrocities” may be used
selectively and for political purposes to refer to various
situations, given the lack of clarity and agreement on
the United Nations mechanisms and bodies that would
be responsible for their identification and classification.
In a United Nations where attempts are made
to impose rather than negotiate and countries are
threatened because of their sovereign decisions, there
is a very valid concern about the lack of definition as
to who decides when there is a need to protect; who
determines that a State is not protecting its population;
and who decides what action is to be taken and on the
basis of what criteria. Nor is it clear so far how we can
ensure that the option to take action is implemented
with the consent of the affected State, so as to avoid
using that concept as a justification for a supposed and
non-existent right to intervene.
International efforts to prevent the occurrence
of acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or
crimes against humanity — an objective that Cuba has
always shared — should contribute to strengthening the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, in particular sovereign

equality, territorial integrity and self-determination.
However, the ambiguities of that concept and the
implications of the exercise of its so-called three
pillars run counter to those purposes and principles.
For that reason, the pre-eminence of the principles of
voluntarism, prior request and the consent of States
should be recognized in the context of the responsibility
to protect.
If the intention is to prevent, the root causes of
those situations — such as underdevelopment, poverty,
an unjust international economic order, inequality
and social exclusion, hunger, marginalization, food
insecurity or a lack of access to drinking water — should
be addressed, as well as the structural problems that
determine the outbreak of conflicts that escalate to
extreme situations, among others, that, unfortunately,
are not promoted with the same force by many of
those who defend the advancement of the concept of
the responsibility to protect. Those would be real acts
of prevention.
Finally, we reiterate that ensuring that the
international community does not remain indifferent in
the face of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity is a noble effort. In many cases,
however, the promotion of the responsibility to protect
masks an interest in having yet another tool to facilitate
interference in internal affairs, with agendas for regime
change and subversion in third countries, most of which
are small and developing States. Unfortunately, world
history is replete with sad examples that justify such
a concern.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): We welcome the
inclusion of the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity on the formal agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-second session.
At a time when the atrocities committed in various
corners of the world continue to cause unprecedented
human suffering, the international community must
address the issue of preventing such crimes. We thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive annual
report (A/72/884), which constitutes a solid basis for
our deliberations today.
At the 2005 World Summit, Member States
made a landmark commitment with regard to their
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Unfortunately, the report of the Secretary-

General portrays a daunting picture concerning the
negative trends in that regard. Since 2005, deaths
caused by armed conflicts have increased tenfold and
the number of people forcibly displaced has reached
record levels. It is clear that civilians are the ones who
pay the highest price when Member States fail to uphold
their responsibility to protect. As we speak, millions of
innocent people who have had to flee their homes owing
to the atrocities committed in Syria, Myanmar and
elsewhere are seeking to survive in desperate situations.
In order to prevent and alleviate that immense human
suffering, the international community must consider
efficient ways and means to narrow the gap between its
commitments and actions.
The responsibility to protect has not yet become an
established norm of international law, and its scope and
implementation should be defined and refined. Efforts
in that regard should not be carried out in a way that
reinterprets or renegotiates well-established principles
of international law or the existing legal framework.
Crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity are well-defined legal
concepts. We should implement the relevant legal
framework faithfully and consistently. We should also
bear in mind that the concept of the responsibility to
protect seeks to establish a delicate balance between
safeguarding the humanitarian concerns of the
international community while respecting the principle
of national sovereignty. Pursuing a non-selective
approach vis-à-vis the implementation of that concept
is key if we are to achieve the widest possible consensus
among the membership on that important issue.
Discussions such as the ones we are having today can
contribute to progress in that regard.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s approach,
which has a central focus on prevention. Indeed,
prevention is one of the most effective instruments in
our toolbox. Turkey believes that preventive policies and
mediation efforts should have a more prominent role.
With that understanding. Turkey attaches particular
importance to preventive diplomacy and is pioneering
mediation efforts not only in the United Nations but
also through regional and bilateral initiatives in our
wider geographical area and working actively for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. When efforts aimed
at prevention do not succeed, United Nations organs,
including the Security Council, must remain ready to
assume their responsibilities as enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. We hope that the discussions on

the responsibility to protect and its implementation will
also contribute to the efforts aimed at restraining the
use of the veto power in the Security Council where
crimes against humanity and the crime of genocide
are concerned.
Before concluding, I would like to underscore
that ensuring accountability for crimes that have been
committed should also be an indispensable component
of our discussion today. Accountability is essential not
only to avoiding impunity and delivering justice but
also to preventing the recurrence of atrocities in future.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
membership of the United Nations has remained
a symbol of State independence and sovereignty.
The United Nations has also become the principal
international forum for collective work aimed at
realizing the three objectives of State-building,
nation-building and economic development. The
United Nations has therefore become the main arena
in which the sovereignty of States is strongly defended
and not abandoned.
In a world characterized by disparities in power and
resources, in many States sovereignty is the best, and
sometimes the first and only, line of defence. However,
it is more than a functional concept in international
relations. It is a recognition for many States and nations
of their equality in status and dignity with other States
and nations. It protects their unique identity and
national freedom, and asserts their right to determine
their own destiny.
States and the international community must
work together to tackle the root causes of internal
conflicts. Required or beneficial interventions should
provide support in terms of meeting existing needs
and addressing the negative political aspects of a
situation, with a view to establishing democracy,
promoting capacity-building and adopting measures
for confidence-building among communities and
various groups, while addressing issues of economic
deprivation and lack of opportunity.
Over the past three decades, the urgency of the
problem of dealing decisively with the causes of
environmental deterioration has grown, as it is directly
responsible for internal conflicts and poses a real threat
to the existence of planet Earth. This is a danger not
just to international peace and security but to the very
existence of the human race.

Development
assistance
and
cooperation
are necessary in order to counter the inequitable
distribution of resources and opportunities, strengthen
economic growth, enhance the terms of trade, provide
access to international markets for the products of
developing nations, encourage essential economic
and structural reforms and provide technical support
in order to promote the relevant instruments and
organizational institutions. Tackling root causes also
means strengthening legal protections and existing
legal institutions while supporting efforts aimed at
promoting the rule of law and protecting and ensuring
the independence of judicial systems.
If our objectives are to strengthen, not weaken, the
sovereignty of States and improve the capacity of the
international community to respond vigorously when
a State commits serious violations of human rights and
fails to protect its citizens, it is essential to reconcile
the two objectives. This issue requires further study
in a spirit of creativity, so as to devise fresh solutions
under the umbrella of international law, in particular
the Charter of the United Nations.
We should recall in this regard that a number of great
politicians in the international arena have commented
on the concept of the responsibility to protect by saying
that although the objective is a noble one, the concept
itself gives rise to a number of questions. It is our
conviction that this description is accurate. It certainly
reflects our own position.
(spoke in English)
Finally, we have to remember that the post-Second
World War order was built on collective security and
the prohibition of acts of aggression, particularly
inter-State wars of aggression. The peacekeeping and
peacebuilding system has given due and satisfactory
attention to internal conflicts and the attendant risk of
violations. In many, if not nearly all, Security Council
resolutions on situations of internal conflict and
violence, the Council has qualified such situations as
threats to international peace and security. It would
therefore not be possible to perceive the existence of
any vacuum were the current situation not built on a
post-1990 order that is primarily driven by the desire to
consolidate interests and influence.
The concept of the responsibility to protect as
advanced today is marred by contradictions in relation
to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the system of collective security that it created. It

is marred by indifference to the fact that the concept
is being exclusively directed at developing countries
suffering from underdevelopment, environmental
degradation and internal conflict. Indeed, and most
importantly, it is marred by the selective approach that
it fosters, built as it is on mere feasibility. That is why
the concept is theoretically linked to and promoted in
conjunction with the call to promote the jurisdiction of
the infamous International Criminal Court.
Ascribing primary responsibility to States as a
justification for advancing the notion of responsibility
to protect is fallacious. The primary-responsibility
principle, as provided for in Article 24 of the Charter,
is linked to the operation of Chapter VII of the Charter
on collective security. The responsibility to protect is a
repudiation of Chapter VII of the Charter.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
thanks the President of the General Assembly for
organizing today’s debate and the Secretary-General
for his report on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884)
and, above all, for his personal commitment to the
issue. I would also like to thank the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, whose
work and dedication I commend.
The concept of the responsibility to protect
was endorsed in 2005 by all States members of the
General Assembly so that States would never again
commit atrocities against their own citizens. Yet as the
Secretary-General has pointed out, despite the fact that
we will be commemorating the seventieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on
10 December, the most serious crimes are unfortunately
far from being on the decline around the world, whether
in Syria, Burma, South Sudan or the Central African
Republic, to cite some striking examples. Working
together, we must — and we can — do more to protect
the most vulnerable.
Despite the solemn commitments we have jointly
made, tragic situations that the United Nations is
powerless to address continue to prevail. We all are
thinking here, of course, of the situation in Syria.
Over the past seven years, the Syrian regime has
committed numerous crimes against its own people,
including through the use of chemical weapons,
and has consistently violated its obligations under
international law, primarily in humanitarian matters.
This is an incontrovertible fact that has been repeatedly
established by robust and impartial mechanisms that

form part of our collective security architecture.
However, the United Nations has been prevented from
acting effectively because of Russia’s 12 vetoes in the
Security Council.
France is not resigned to that situation. On the
contrary, we call on those who have influence over the
Syrian regime to assume their responsibilities. It is in
that spirit that France, through its highest authorities,
has engaged Russia and Iran in recent months,
pragmatically and in accordance with principles of
international law, so that urgent concrete measures can
be taken on the ground to end the suffering of the men,
women and children of Syria. That is the primary goal
of the Small Group of the Global Coalition to Counter
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, of which France
is part, which is meeting today in Geneva with Staffan
de Mistura, the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria.
Another tragic situation that shocks the conscience
is that of the Rohingya. More than 720,000 have fled
Burma to Bangladesh since the end of August 2017.
France reiterates its condemnation of the serious human
rights violations committed against the Rohingya
people. The Security Council has visited the area, and
the measures taken by the Burmese authorities are a
first step, but the commitments have yet to be translated
into action. Much progress remains to be made. It is
therefore essential to ensure that the international
community, especially through the Security Council,
remains vigilant and mobilized.
It is up to every State to protect its own peoples.
If States fail to do so, however, it is the responsibility
of the international community, represented by our
Organization and within it the Security Council, to
work tirelessly to that end. Considering the magnitude
of the challenges, the Council must be able to respond,
especially in situations of mass atrocities. In that
regard, France and Mexico have proposed a concrete
measure — suspending the use of the veto in the event
of mass atrocities. We invite all States, especially the
other four permanent members of the Council, to join
that initiative.
We also have a responsibility to support the fight
against impunity and to support independent and
impartial justice. With the support of France and other
partners, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
supports the operationalization of the Special Criminal
Court, which has competence in serious violations of

human rights and international humanitarian law, as
well as other abuses that may constitute war crimes,
crimes of genocide and crimes against humanity.
France calls on all States to support and cooperate
with fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry and
international criminal justice instruments — first and
foremost of which is the International Criminal Court,
in the case of the most serious crimes. We must remain
vigilant against those who spread ethnic and religious
hatred and violence, which the Security Council still
has the means to sanction.
Mr. Tevi (Vanuatu), Vice-President, took the Chair.
France believes that the Geneva-based institutions
and mechanisms are also essential in preventing and
responding to mass crimes, whether through the
Universal Periodic Review or the regular briefings of
the Security Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
When we talk about the responsibility to protect,
we are not talking about a principle meant to divide;
we are talking about a compass to protect populations.
The responsibility to pronect is not in opposition
to sovereignty, quite the contrary. By definition, a
principle of action can always be enriched, and that is
where the United Nations and the whole international
community can play their key role. France will continue
to play its full part.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for Argentina to participate in
this debate, which represents a unique opportunity for
analysing the pending challenges to the international
community with regard to the responsibility to protect.
First of all, I would like to welcome the tenth report
of the Secretary-General (A/72/884), which stresses that
early action is central to the responsibility to protect.
As the report indicates, while there has been progress
in efforts to implement the responsibility to protect,
there is a growing gap between our responsibilities and
the daily experience of vulnerable populations. It is
noted that the main problem is the failure to translate
early warnings of atrocity crimes into effective early
action so as to prevent them.
Argentina shares the Secretary-General’s diagnosis
and believes that all States, as equal and sovereign,
have reciprocal rights and responsibilities, and all
should be equally committed to the protection of their
populations from atrocity crimes, through respect for

international law, especially humanitarian law, human
rights norms and refugee law, as well as the to the fight
against impunity.
In that context, Argentina considers that prevention
is the most important dimension in protecting
populations from atrocity crimes. That requires building
capacity in States by training public officials capable of
preventing the four crimes under the responsibility to
protect. It is also crucial to ensure the participation of
other actors such as civil society, since in many cases
they are the ones working in the field with States and
providing important technical assistance. The positive
role of regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution efforts should be
highlighted as well. We also consider it important to
increase our efforts to empower women as agents in the
prevention of atrocity crimes.
We believe it is essential to strengthen the
accountability of those responsible for atrocity crimes.
The ratification of the Rome Statute and its amendments
is key to protecting populations in the light of the
Statute’s contribution to the fight against impunity and
as a deterrent mechanism.
Also, on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary
of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, we must reiterate the importance
of ratifying that effective international instrument for
accountability. We also invite all Member States to
endorse the Safe Schools Declaration, in support of
which my country had the honour to organize the second
international conference in Buenos Aires in 2017.
Argentina supports the initiatives of the United
Nations system, such as the responsibility to protect,
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding actions, the
promotion of the rule of law and the Human Rights
Up Front initiative, among others. We would also like
to highlight the contribution of the Global Network
of R2P Focal Points, composed of 60 Member States,
including Argentina, as a tool for building individual
and collective capacities to prevent mass atrocities. I
want to express our support for the work of the Office
for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect and the crucial role played by both Special
Advisers in an area so relevant to our country.
In conclusion, Argentina would like to reiterate
the importance of reaffirming our commitment to the
responsibility to protect, redoubling our efforts towards
its full implementation and underscoring once again

the fundamental role of prevention and accountability
from a cross-cutting and comprehensive perspective in
all our efforts and initiatives.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
the President for convening this meeting of the General
Assembly on the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity.
Even though the General Assembly is holding
its first formal meeting since 2009, it has remained
seized of the matter, albeit in an informal manner.
My delegation was among those that preferred the
continuation of our discussion within the existing
framework, for we were not fully convinced of the
utility of a one-off formal meeting of the Assembly on
an issue that evokes such divergent viewpoints on its
nature, scope and application.
In any case, we believe that the onus should not
be on the modalities of our discussion but rather
on the substantive nature of the differences in our
perspectives and viewpoints. Or course, that view in
no way diminishes my country’s abiding commitment
to the safety and security of all our citizens. That is, in
fact, an obligation inherent in the nature of sovereignty
and national responsibility.
In recent days, the issue of protection has come
into a renewed global spotlight, in particular because
of the grave situation in occupied Palestine. It is also in
Palestine that the failure of the international community
to uphold those norms has been most manifest and
telling. Thus, as the killing fields of Gaza were drenched
in the blood of more than 130 innocent Palestinians,
including women and children, the Security Council
was a silent bystander to the plight of the long-suffering
Palestinian people. Even more disturbing, while the
safety and protection of Palestinian civilians throughout
the occupied territory is a right expressly recognized in
several Security Council resolutions, the Council failed
to reaffirm that right on 1 June. As we all know, as a
result, on 13 June the General Assembly had to step in
(see A/ES-10/PV.38) yet again to fill the void left by the
Security Council’s inaction.
The edifice of the responsibility to protect stands
on more tenuous ground today than ever before,
for decisions taken by the international community
have often failed the test of the highest standards of
objectivity and impartiality. That masquerade of
political expediency posing as high-flowing idealism

has meant that resultant actions have lacked the legal
and moral legitimacy to gain wider acceptability. After
all, if we are selective in our approach, expressing
indignation at some transgressions while choosing to
wilfully ignore others, any norm will quickly turn into
mere pretence.
Against that backdrop, calls for accountability
would invariably smack of double standards and
selectivity, especially when egregious crimes, including
killing and mass blinding, are being committed in full
view of the international community. Many of those
tragic victims, including in Indian-occupied Jammu
and Kashmir, have the further indignity of living
under foreign occupation, which is illegal. What is
therefore needed is not an abdication of our collective
responsibility to prevent those grave crimes but a
willingness to apply consistent and uniform standards
of moral outrage to all of them.
The will of the international community,
particularly the permanent members of the Security
Council, is obviously crucial. That is especially
important to addressing issues of the admissibility of
actions and to ensure their consistency, since we have
seen that in the face of divisions within the Council,
unilateral actions have led to situations characterized
as illegal but legitimate. We should neither attempt to
establish nor accept any artificial duality between the
twin imperatives of legitimacy and legality. We should
also be mindful that the notion of the responsibility to
protect cannot give way to a mere re-enactment of the
discredited humanitarian interventions of the past. For
we know only too well that such eventualities would be
reserved only for the most powerful States and might
actually lead to preventing justice itself from being
administered.
At its core, the responsibility to protect is not a
license to intervene in external situations but rather a
universal principle of non-indifference, in keeping with
the historical context and cultural norms of individual
settings. It is predicated on the express recognition that
the responsibility for the protection of civilians lies,
first and foremost, with Member States. Set against
the overarching principle of State sovereignty, the
responsibility to protect cannot become a basis on
which to contravene the principles of non-interference
and non-intervention, or to question the national
sovereignty or territorial integrity of States.

In a world beset by growing socioeconomic
inequalities, situations leading to the responsibility
to protect are more often than not the result of
underdevelopment and poverty. A renewed commitment
to helping States build their capacity, including through
governance and judicial reforms, is therefore crucial. A
long-term commitment on the part of the international
community, including to mobilizing adequate resources
for sustainable development and poverty eradication,
as also reflected in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, is the best investment in prevention.
As rightly noted by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (A/72/884), it costs far more to pick up the
pieces after a crisis than it does to prevent it. What is
therefore needed is a surge in diplomacy, not in conflict,
in order to achieve the goal of preventing grave crimes
against humanity.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): At the outset, let me just say
that I think it is regrettable that some here have injected
political ideas into this forum rather than focusing on
constructive comments on the important topic of the
responsibility to protect.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to Australia and Ghana for their commitment to this
vital issue, and for promoting a debate in the General
Assembly under a new agenda item. Israel supports the
inclusion of the topic of the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity on the formal
agenda of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/72/884).
As we read the news every day, we are reminded of
the importance of this issue. In every region, from Africa
to the Middle East and from Asia to Latin America, we
see the human toll of conflicts — in lives lost, families
torn apart and the millions of men, women and children
who have been left homeless and even stateless. As the
Secretary-General said, trends continue to move in the
wrong direction. Peace and security seem farther away
than ever, and the price is paid by civilians throughout
the world. We have to reverse those trends.
Israel, the nation State of the Jewish people,
understands the importance of the international
community’s responsibility to prevent genocide and
mass atrocities. Our understanding is born of centuries
of torment, persecution and exile, culminating in the
Holocaust — a systematic State-sponsored genocide

that murdered one third of our people. In fact, it is the
atrocities of the Holocaust that led the international
community to pledge “never again”, and to strive to
uphold that promise through the establishment of this
very institution. But our global community has fallen
short. There are still too many instances where that
promise has not been fulfilled. History does not forget,
and it will not forgive the international community if
it does not act to prevent genocide and mass atrocities.
Israel’s unwavering commitment to the prevention
of genocide and mass atrocities led us to join the
consensus on the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (resolution 60/1), including paragraphs 138
and 139, which adopt the principle of the responsibility
to protect. At the same time, we stress that this doctrine
does not create new legal norms or obligations, but
rather must be construed and applied within existing
legal frameworks. Given the fact that this is a novel
doctrine, we want to highlight the need for further
deliberation and discussion. We would like to offer
some preliminary suggestions as to how to make that
principle more effective in practice.
For the responsibility to protect to become an
effective doctrine, it must also address the role and
responsibility of non-State actors and terrorist groups
that commit atrocities while blatantly disregarding
international law. Furthermore, the doctrine should
focus only on the most severe situations that involve
mass atrocities, ethnic cleansing or genocide.
One of the most important issues with regard to the
responsibility to protect is the primary responsibility of
States to protect their own civilians. The international
community must encourage and assist States in their
efforts to carry out this responsibility. We must maintain
our focus on this aspect of the doctrine and strengthen
our efforts in the areas of early warning and prevention.
To ensure effective and long-term prevention of mass
atrocities, we must start at the foundations of States and
societies. We must help States that wish to adopt stable
democratic institutions, based on the institutional
framework of the separation of powers and the rule
of law, to do so successfully. For Israel, those are
not just words. We have extensive capacity-building
programmes in cooperation with United Nations
agencies to help interested States, mainly developing
and post-conflict countries, build and strengthen their
judicial institutions.

Another crucial aspect that deserves our focus
is education, particularly for our young people. It
is of the utmost importance that young people today
understand rule-of-law values, human rights, tolerance
and coexistence. A well-known saying warns us that
those who cannot remember the past are condemned
to repeat it. We must ensure that younger generations
are fully equipped with a detailed understanding of
history, including its atrocities and their causes and
repercussions for the affected societies. In Israel, those
elements are a central part of our core curriculum, with
many schools organizing educational delegations to
Holocaust sites in Europe.
Paragraph 138 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document stipulates that it is the responsibility of
every State to protect its population from the crimes
outlined, including their incitement. The realities on
the ground today show that incitement to hatred and
violence is a growing phenomenon. It has become a
major contributor to the increase in atrocities and other
crimes committed. We therefore believe that greater
attention should be given to the dangerous role of
incitement and ways of countering it when developing a
doctrine for the responsibility to protect.
It is our responsibility to ensure that the atrocities
of today do not continue tomorrow. We must never
allow innocent civilians to pay the price of war, and
by developing the most effective doctrine for the
responsibility to protect, through our investment in
capacity-building and education, we can help re-route
our priorities and, in doing so, leave atrocities in the
past and strive for a more peaceful and secure future.
Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): We thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening this timely
debate on the responsibility to protect and the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his 2018 report (A/72/884), entitled “Responsibility
to protect: from early warning to early action”.
South Africa believes that the role of the
international community in conflicts must remain
that of assisting affected States. That must be done
in accordance with their own constitutional and legal
provisions and with the acknowledgment that the
Security Council has a responsibility to act to stop such
violations if it becomes clear that the specific State is
manifestly failing to implement its responsibility in
that regard.

The political basis for the responsibility to
protect was firmly set out in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (resolution 60/1). Our respective
leaders displayed a clear intolerance for impunity and
criminality by adopting the document by consensus.
Going back on that undertaking is therefore not
an option.
My delegation strongly agrees that prevention of
atrocities is central to the successful implementation of
the responsibility to protect. We continue to advocate
for greater focus on the wide range of the tools of
diplomacy available to us. South Africa has long been
a proponent of improving response methods provided
in the Charter of the United Nations for the pacific
settlement of disputes, and of ensuring that the Security
Council redirects its responses to emerging conflicts.
The failure to employ new response mechanisms puts
the responsibility on the General Assembly to take
action, especially if populations are at risk of suffering
from crimes in the context of the responsibility to
protect. In addition, we believe that in order to succeed,
the responsibility to protect requires the sustained and
predictable provision of resources.
Present-day conflicts are largely centred on internal
strife in Member States and transnational threats.
Unfortunately, while the world has changed, the Security
Council has largely remained the same. Contemporary
challenges have brought divisions within the Council to
the forefront, especially among its permanent members.
At times, such paralysis has cost human lives. A more
representative Council would be more effective in
dealing with complex contemporary challenges. As
advised by the Secretary-General, preventive action
is built on trust, transparency and accountability. The
Security Council should therefore be cognizant of
that in its assessments and decision-making if it is to
be effective.
South Africa continues to advocate for a more
representative Security Council with a stronger voice for
those closer to crises, and guided by non-discriminatory
decision-making and collective interests rather than
narrow national ones. The Council should therefore
increase its engagement with Member States, especially
those affected by conflict, and be open to effective
engagement with regional and subregional institutions.
We also believe that there should be no selectivity
in the implementation of the responsibility to protect
aimed at instigating any Government change. We

reiterate that the three pillars of the responsibility to
protect are mutually supporting and non-sequential,
while emphasizing the importance of prioritizing
and meaningfully investing in the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Furthermore, we believe that the
responsibility to protect must give priority to the
core interests of the safety and well-being of affected
civilians and populations. The responsibility to protect
must not be the narrow national interest of those who
seek intervention or who implement Security Council
mandates. Any Council mandate imposing a collective
international responsibility to protect response must
be fully respected and implemented in the letter and
spirit of its provisions rather than using the mandate as
a pretext for other motives.
We too welcome the report and its recommendations,
which reaffirm that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their populations. We also
note the recommendation that Member States appoint
a senior official to serve as national focal point for the
responsibility to protect to coordinate national activities,
share good practices and spearhead cooperation. In that
regard, South Africa has appointed a focal point on the
responsibility to protect to inform the Global Network.
That represents a clear commitment to strengthening
prevention efforts and accountability measures.
Furthermore, we also agree with the report that regional
and subregional arrangements have a unique and vitally
important role to play in the prevention of atrocity
crimes and in developing regional capacities for the
early warning and assessment of atrocity crimes.
We support the proposal whereby regional entities
and the United Nations can explore ways to improve
the transmission of information and analysis in order
to facilitate coordinated assessments and responses.
In that regard, the South African Government remains
committed to fully contributing to conflict prevention
efforts, the protection of civilians and achieving
sustainable peace within the framework of concerted
multilateralism. At the regional level, the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in partnership
with other multilateral agencies, has set up early
warning systems and directed member States to set up
national early-warning centres to monitor connectivity
and compliance.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support
and commitment to the implementation of the rights

and obligations under the instruments of international
human rights law and international law.
Mrs. Anderberg (Sweden): Sweden fully aligns
itself with the statements delivered by the observer of
the European Union and by the representative of Qatar
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect (see A/72/PV.99).
The responsibility to protect is a commitment to
protecting populations from atrocity crimes. In the 2005
World Summit Outcome document (resolution 60/1), all
States Members of the United Nations expressed their
commitment to the responsibility to protect concept and
its three pillars. Since then, the responsibility to protect
has received some misleading criticism in relation to
the use of military interventions to stop atrocity crimes.
Collective action under the third pillar may include
coercive or non-coercive measures, and it is imperative
that they are in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
We need to acknowledge the responsibility to
protect in its broader sense and to stress the basics
of the concept. The core of the concept lies in
prevention. The continuing work on identifying risks,
developing early warning systems and early assessment
capabilities all aims to prevent atrocity crimes.
However, early warning must be followed by early
action. In that respect, we welcome the report of the
Secretary-General, entitled “Responsibility to protect:
from early warning to early action” (A/72/884). We
support the report’s recommendations, including with
regard to strengthening existing capacities, promoting
accountability and recognizing the contribution of
all actors, including the role of women, in preventing
atrocity crimes.
It is the obligation of each State to protect its
population. There is also the larger commitment of the
international community as a whole to supporting States
in meeting their responsibilities. We therefore welcome
the engagement of the international community and the
inclusion of the responsibility to protect as a formal
item on the agenda of the upcoming session of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
thanks the President of the General Assembly and
the Secretary-General for their statements (see A/72/
PV.99), and Australia and Ghana for their leadership
in including the responsibility to protect on the
agenda of the General Assembly. The inclusion of

the responsibility to protect on the formal agenda of
the General Assembly provides an opportunity to
reflect on our shared responsibility in preventing mass
atrocity crimes.
We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General (A/72/884). We
also wish to underscore the work accomplished by
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Dieng, and the former
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
Mr. Šimonović, in mainstreaming atrocity prevention
within the United Nations system. Given our shared
priority for prevention, we hope that a Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect will soon be appointed.
(spoke in English)
At the 2005 World Summit, Heads of State and
Government committed to preventing international
atrocity crimes by adopting the key principles that
underpin the responsibility to protect. Despite the robust
normative framework that has been developed over the
years to protect populations from grievous harm, as we
speak, 65.6 million people, a large proportion of whom
are children, are forcibly displaced around the world. In
Syria, Yemen, Myanmar and South Sudan, to name just
a few country-specific situations, millions are seeking
protection and the preservation of their livelihoods
and basic human dignity. As noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the responsibility to protect,
the overall trend since 2005 is a tenfold increase in
civilian deaths.
Numbers matter, but so do the stories behind the
numbers. Behind every death is a genuine human
tragedy for an individual, a family and community.
Those left behind are left to cope with deep trauma
for which no statistics can account. In addition, illegal
attacks on civilians, civilian infrastructure, health
care and medical and humanitarian personnel and the
denial of life-saving humanitarian assistance leave
wide-ranging and cumulative scars.
The multilateral and rules-based international order
that binds us together requires our sustained support
more than ever. Respect for international human rights
law and international humanitarian law is essential to
safeguarding humankind. If we are to prevent atrocity
crimes, we must understand and implement the lessons
of the past. We can do far more to prevent conflict,
including by building State capacities for early warning,
conflict analysis, dispute resolution and mediation.

States that invest in inclusivity and cohesion, allow
civil society to thrive and welcome civil-society voices
benefit from increased stability and diversity. However,
there are troubling instances where Member States
seek to constrain the voices of civil society, including
within the United Nations itself. States with effective,
accountable institutions are among the best defenders
of human rights.
Canada supports the renewed focus of the United
Nations on prevention and champions the values
of inclusive and accountable governance, peaceful
pluralism, gender equality and human rights. We
believe that inclusive national ownership can reduce the
stresses that may lead to conflict and can help to build
resilience and prevent internal crises from escalating
and engulfing countries and regions.
Canada believes that women play an integral role
in building a culture of prevention. We are committed
to promoting the full, active and equal participation
of women in conflict prevention, resolution and postconflict State-building.
If prevention fails, the response should be a
collective one. The Security Council has a specific
responsibility to ensure that early warning leads to
appropriate responses. There is a humanitarian cost
to inaction or to inadequate actions. It is essential that
the Security Council come together to take appropriate
action when atrocity risks emerge. In that regard, we
encourage more regular briefings to the Council by the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect and by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Canada is proud of the leadership role it has
played in establishing the International Criminal Court
(ICC), which will celebrate its twentieth anniversary
in July. Canada remains a strong supporter of and
advocate for the ICC and shares the values that it stands
for — fighting impunity and ensuring that victims of
the most serious international crimes have a path to
justice and accountability.
We have a strong normative framework aimed
at improving our collective approach and capacity to
protect civilians. We remain committed to preventive
actions and urge States to uphold their obligations
under international human rights, humanitarian and
refugee law, which underpin our commitment to the
responsibility to protect.

Mr. Sauer (Finland): Finland aligns itself with the
statements made earlier by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Qatar on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
(see A/72/PV.99).
We thank the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General for their statements today
(ibid.). Finland welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his report, entitled “Responsibility
to protect: from early warning to early action”
(A/72/884). As the title suggests, translating early
warning into early action is crucial. The responsibility
to protect remains central to our common agenda for
preventing genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. We also thank Australia
and Ghana for their leadership in including the
responsibility to protect on the agenda of the General
Assembly this year.
Earlier this month, the Ministries of Foreign Affairs
of Finland and Mexico, in cooperation with the Global
Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, hosted the
eighth Annual Meeting of the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points in Helsinki. The meeting brought together
national focal points and other participants from more
than 40 countries and international organizations that
aim to promote the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of mass atrocity at the national, regional and
international levels. Among the invited participants
was the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng.
The Helsinki meeting provided an excellent
opportunity for the participants to exchange
experiences and best practices on how to integrate
responsibility-to-protect considerations into their daily
work at the national level and in foreign policy. The
meeting highlighted the role of mediation and noted
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We believe that it
was important in reaffirming that there are still forces
that believe strongly in the rule of law and the rulesbased international order.
Lastly, Finland remains a staunch supporter of the
ICC. We hope that the twentieth anniversary of the
Rome Statute will serve to highlight the value and the
results of the ICC. The goal of ending impunity for the
most serious international crimes is high on the agenda
of Finland’s foreign policy. We are very much justified
in discussing the role of the ICC during today’s meeting,

since support to the activities of the Court could also
act as a deterrent.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Ireland welcomes the
inclusion of the responsibility to protect on the agenda
of the General Assembly. We hope it can evolve into a
standing item for future debates.
The World Summit Outcome document of 2005 was
a groundbreaking achievement, and since its adoption,
the responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing has emerged as an important global principle.
Paragraphs 138 and 139 of that document effectively
outline the three pillars of responsibility, assistance
and response. Ireland reaffirms its commitment to
those pillars.
The three pillars were never intended to be
sequential in their implementation. Rather, they focused
on an early and flexible response tailored to individual
situations. In particular, misconceptions about the
relationship between the third pillar and military
intervention must be addressed. From diplomacy,
mediation, public advocacy and humanitarian
assistance to peacekeeping, sanctions, embargoes and
peacebuilding, the broad range of measures available
under the third pillar effectively guards against its
being equated with military intervention.
Ireland warmly welcomes the Secretary-General’s
balanced report, entitled “Responsibility to protect:
from early warning to early action” (A/72/884). Its
focus on strengthening existing capacities, promoting
accountability and expanding civilian action provides
important guidance on how we might prioritize action in
the area of the responsibility to protect. The report also
notes that the gap between our words of commitment
and the experience of vulnerable populations around
the world has grown. Thirteen years after agreeing to
the principle of the responsibility to protect, we must
now prioritize and meaningfully invest in taking its
implementation forward within the United Nations.
The report states that the international community has
been insufficiently resolute in its implementation and
that trends continue to move in the wrong direction.
Given that we are marking the seventieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide this year, we
strongly encourage Member States that have not yet
ratified or acceded to the Convention to do so as a matter
of high priority. We also call on the States Members

of the United Nations to support the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which has been
endorsed by 117 countries, and the French and Mexican
declaration on voluntary restraint in the use of the veto
by permanent members of the Security Council. Those
complementary initiatives are crucial to ensuring that
the Security Council acts effectively and consistently
when faced with mass atrocity situations.
Ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes
is one of best ways to prevent their recurrence.
Recognizing that States have the primary responsibility
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed
within their jurisdiction, Ireland fully supports the
International Criminal Court, which will celebrate its
twentieth anniversary on 17 July. It remains the most
important institutional development in the battle to end
impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We also welcome the European Union’s
appointment of national responsibility-to-protect focal
points and encourage other regional organizations and
Member States to do likewise and to engage in the
excellent work of the Global Network of R2P Focal
Points.
Multilateral cooperation is our best chance to avert
man-made atrocities. We therefore encourage better
use of the United Nations system to bring potential
mass atrocity situations to the early attention of the
Security Council. As a candidate for the Security
Council for the 2021-2022 term, Ireland will seek to
ensure that the Council acts to prevent mass atrocities,
but it can do so only if alerted to the situations in time.
Regular open debates within the Security Council on
the responsibility to protect are to be encouraged, as
are regular briefings by the Special Advisers of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect. The Council would
also benefit from regular briefings on mass atrocity
situations by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Such measures can only serve to
aid early-warning situations in which populations are
at risk of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.
With regard to the link between the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council, Geneva-based
institutions and mechanisms play an increasingly
important role in preventing and responding to mass
atrocity crimes. We encourage the informal dialogue

that has taken place with a view to improving the use of
the universal periodic review in that connection.
Ireland’s strong peacekeeping tradition allows
us to recognize the importance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations as a vehicle for integrating
responsibility-to-protect capacities. In line with
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
peacekeepers need the requisite training and resources
to adequately protect civilians. In that context, we
encourage the integration of the United Nations
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes into the
training of all United Nations peacekeeping staff.
The principle of the responsibility to protect is now
widely accepted, yet concerns about its appropriate
implementation continue to be debated. While debate
is to be encouraged for so critical a concept, it must
not be used as an excuse for passivity or inaction.
The international community must stand firm against
the incorrect application of the responsibility to
protect through a broadening of its scope, its selective
application or its malicious misapplication for a State’s
own strategic interests. The responsibility to protect
does not lower the threshold for pre-emptive intervention
or use of force. However, any ambiguity surrounding
the operationalization of the concept must be addressed
and agreed on so that it can be effectively implemented.
Ireland is deeply concerned about the worrying
trend of the use of forced displacement as a military
tactic by State and non-State actors and its disastrous
consequences, particularly for minority populations.
There is an undeniable connection between the current
global crisis of forced displacement and the failure to
uphold the responsibility to protect and prevent mass
atrocity crimes.
As the Secretary-General states in his report, we
have allowed disagreements about the past to foil our
unity of purpose in the present. We continue to miss
opportunities to save countless lives in situations we
could and should have foreseen. Through the proper
operationalization of the responsibility to protect, we
can make major strides towards preventing instances of
mass atrocities and loss of life.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): The convening of today’s
formal debate on the responsibility to protect is a
milestone indeed, as it is the first such debate in the
General Assembly since 2009. It is our hope that this
debate will see an open and frank discussion, as it

presents a unique opportunity for all Member States to
put their views on record.
We thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884),
which points out that much more must be done by the
international community to prevent genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,
and sets out recommendations on how early warning can
be improved. It also outlines a strategy for strengthening
early action. I would like to make three points.
First, as the Secretary-General has reiterated in his
report, the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilian populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity rests with
the State. National Governments cannot abdicate their
responsibility to protect their own citizens. Instability
and extremism flourish when the needs and aspirations
of citizens are not met. Accordingly, human development
is key and its link with the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) is very important. The onus is on each
of us to implement the SDGs, in particular SDG 16, on
promoting peaceful and inclusive societies, justice for
all and effective, accountable and inclusive institutions.
We agree with the Secretary-General that inclusive and
sustainable development is the best form of prevention
against all kinds of risks, including atrocity crimes.
Secondly, international partnership and support are
essential to improving national resilience. The United
Nations, regional organizations and civil society must
work with one another to support and implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and create
in each of our countries the necessary institutions
and capacities for a resilient and inclusive society.
Prevention is certainly better than cure. The priority
must be to help countries ensure that the conditions for
instability and conflict do not arise. And when they do,
the international community must act collectively and
in a spirit of solidarity.
That leads me to my third point. The international
community must be prepared to take collective action
to help address situations where crimes of atrocity have
occurred. But to do so, it must act through the United
Nations, as was made clear in paragraph 139 of the
World Summit Outcome document, which our Heads
of State and Government endorsed in 2005. Our leaders
committed to taking such collective action through
the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, on a case-by-case basis and in

cooperation with relevant regional organizations, as
appropriate. In addition, such collective action should
be undertaken only if peaceful means have proved to
be inadequate and national authorities have manifestly
failed to protect their populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Small States such as Singapore look to the Security
Council to fulfil its global responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. Unfortunately, we
have seen the veto used too often in the past to prevent
action to address atrocity crimes. We welcome the fact
that two of the five permanent members of the Council
have supported initiatives to limit the use of the veto in
cases of mass atrocities. We call on the other permanent
members to take a similar position by stating that
they will refrain from using the veto to block Council
action aimed at preventing or ending genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Such a collective
commitment by the permanent members is essential
if we are to signal the resolve of the Council and the
international community to support the responsibilityto-protect agenda.
Ultimately, the responsibility to protect should
be applied according to universally agreed principles
and the Charter, particularly the principle of State
sovereignty. The responsibility to protect is not a
justification for intervention by external actors in
the domestic affairs of sovereign States and should
not be used as such. The reality is that deep concerns
remain about the use of coercive or military measures
against the will of Member States. We must address
such concerns by building understanding, trust and
confidence in the concept of the responsibility to protect.
That can be done through continued dialogue among
Member States, which is the reason for Singapore’s
support of the inclusion of this item on the agenda of
the General Assembly.
The concept of the responsibility to protect must
not be seen to be imposed by one group of countries
on another, and neither should it be applied selectively
or in a way that is seen as furthering the political
agendas of some States. The primacy of the United
Nations system must be maintained in the application
of the responsibility to protect, and approval for any
intervention must be duly authorized. Application of
the responsibility to protect should not lead to unilateral
action or be allowed to weaken the multilateral rulesbased system. Through continued dialogue here in
the General Assembly, we are confident that the

international community can build trust and confidence
and advance our collective efforts to prevent and defeat
atrocity crimes.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me first note that
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier
by the observer of the European Union (see A/72/
PV.99).
Poland welcomes with satisfaction today’s debate
on the responsibility to protect. In 2009 we were a
sponsor of the Assembly’s resolution 63/308, its first
stand-alone resolution on the responsibility to protect,
and we declare our readiness to support that important
concept wherever possible.
I would like to congratulate Australia and Ghana
on their proposal to convene today’s meeting and
to welcome the Secretary-General’s report entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884). There is no doubt that the key to
effective preventive measures is early-warning capacity.
I want to focus on three issues that we believe
are of crucial importance in today’s timely debate:
respect for international law, conflict prevention
and accountability.
First, the international community should get back
to principles. Respect for international law instruments,
including the Charter of the United Nations, can be
a true preventive factor in stopping mass atrocities.
Poland raised that issue during its presidency of the
Security Council last month and organized two open
debates with the aim of promoting the basic rules
of international law. We all had the opportunity to
listen to more than 160 statements calling for respect
for international law. We should be true to our words
and fully comply with the existing set of norms and
standards. We cannot shy away from being vocal when
laws are broken.
The second issue is conflict prevention. Using
the right combination of carefully tailored measures
is crucial. Preventive action should be focused
on specific regions. Measures are most effective
when they are individualized and aimed at specific
problems. There is no one-size-fits-all approach. Local
ownership is critical, and early action succeeds only if
it has the support of those who should benefit from it.
Local, community-level engagement must be further
integrated into preventive action.

Third is accountability. We must not allow those
who commit atrocities to feel they are immune to
prosecution. There is no peace without justice. We are
morally, politically and legally obliged to comply with
existing measures aimed at ending impunity, ensuring
accountability and achieving justice for the victims.
The Security Council — but also the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council — should continue to
consider ways to make better use of existing tools to
strengthen accountability for international crimes.
We have at our disposal sanctions, arms embargoes,
fact-finding missions, independent mechanisms for
collecting and storing evidence, commissions of inquiry
and justice mechanisms, including international and
hybrid courts and tribunals. Everything should be done
to ensure that they are used effectively.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
must renew the commitment that our leaders made at the
2005 World Summit in order to help States build their
capacity to protect their populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
and assist those who are under stress before crisis and
conflict break out. The responsibility to protect is not
an abstract concept. Implementing it means saving the
lives of people who have been left without protection or
hope. We should do our best to let them lead their lives
without suffering.
Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening the first formal meeting of the
General Assembly on the responsibility to protect, and
to express our appreciation to Australia and Ghana for
their leadership in including this topic on the agenda
of the General Assembly. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment and
conviction to the principle and to welcome his report,
entitled “Responsibility to protect: from early warning
to early action” (A/72/884), with its ongoing focus on
prevention, which follows that of last year (A/71/1016).
Since world leaders made their commitment to the
concept of the responsibility to protect at the historic 2005
World Summit, we have made considerable progress in
the area. The Secretary-General has provided Member
States with an annual report since 2009 and appointed
a Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. For
their part, Member States have participated annually in
General Assembly informal dialogues on the occasion
of the Secretary-General’s report and have decided to
include the issue of the responsibility to protect on the

Assembly’s agenda. Furthermore, 60 Member States
have joined the Global Network of R2P Focal Points,
while 50 are working together as members of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect in New York
and Geneva. However, while acknowledging the great
strides that have been made in past years, we must also
recognize that there is still a gap between our desire
to protect vulnerable populations and the reality on
the ground. We should be alarmed by the details in
the report of the Secretary-General, which states that
battle-related deaths have increased tenfold since 2005
and the number of people forcibly displaced has reached
record levels. In that regard, I would like to highlight
three points with regard to the responsibility to protect,
while bearing in mind the recommendations outlined in
the Secretary-General’s report.
First, we must continue to improve existing earlywarning mechanisms at the domestic, regional and
international levels and strengthen synergies among
them to make the prevention of atrocities a practical
programme. As the Secretary-General points out in
his report, the international community’s capacity
for early warning and atrocity-crime risk assessment
has improved considerably in recent years. There are
a variety of useful tools across the United Nations
system, regional and subregional arrangements and
structures such as the United Nations Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes and the Human Rights
Up Front initiative. We must redouble our efforts to
improve effective communication and consolidate more
systematic approaches to early-warning signs.
Secondly, no matter how effectively early-warning
mechanisms work, the responsibility to protect cannot
be realized if their results are not followed by early
action. The Security Council has a special responsibility
for preventing atrocity crimes, mandated by the 2005
World Summit Outcome. In that regard, as a supporter
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group’s code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or
war crimes, and of the political declaration by France
and Mexico, the Republic of Korea is of the view that
the use of the veto should be limited in situations
where immediate action is required in response to mass
atrocity crimes. We must also make better use of the
tools of the United Nations human rights system, such
as the Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic
Review and special procedures, among others, which
can help identify possible risks early on and facilitate

relevant action by national Governments as well as the
international community.
Thirdly, we must continue our efforts to end
impunity and ensure accountability for atrocity crimes
in every corner of the world, since strengthening
accountability is one of the principal ways to prevent
such crimes. It is imperative to ensure that violators of
international law are held accountable for their crimes
through prosecution in national and international
criminal justice systems, including the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, I would also like to
emphasize that justice mechanisms must strengthen
their engagement with civil society, given that it can be
a crucial ally in enhancing their ability to gain access
to critical information, as well as in strengthening
contacts with victims and witnesses.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the commitment of the Republic of Korea
to the responsibility to protect. I look forward to
continuing to work with other Member States with a
view to helping to protect vulnerable people from
acts that the international community as a whole has
condemned as the most egregious crimes.
Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I want to thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening
today’s plenary meeting, which enables all Member
States to deliberate and exchange frank views on the
report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility to
protect, as contained in document A/72/884.
As the General Assembly agreed last year, the
inclusion of the issue of the responsibility to protect
on the Assembly’s agenda underlines the principled
commitment of the United Nations to the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, the number of people killed in conflicts has
risen tenfold since the 2005 World Summit. Such
negative trends pose a serious threat to international
peace and security, as situations involving atrocity
crimes can generate lasting instability both within and
across borders. My delegation shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view that it is important for us to continue
building a world based on the rule of law with strong
multilateral institutions, which can protect its people
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. My delegation also joins other
Member States in acknowledging the noble intentions
of the concept of the responsibility to protect, which

are to ensure that the unspeakable tragedies that have
occurred and are currently occurring in various parts of
the world will never recur.
Malaysia has been closely following the
deliberations on the issue of the responsibility to protect
and the follow-up dialogue sessions since the World
Summit in 2005. My delegation notes that a divergence
of opinions continues to persist among Member States
on the concept, understanding and implementation of
the responsibility to protect, especially with regard to
State sovereignty and an international mandate to act.
Malaysia sincerely hopes that we can quickly resolve
that disagreement in order to respond effectively to
atrocities and prevent more genocides.
Malaysia believes that non-military solutions
should always be the first option, because military
interventions can only cause further human catastrophe.
We will continue to support the use of various
non-military measures in efforts to respond to and
prevent the escalation of atrocity crimes, including
mediation, monitoring, observer and fact-finding
missions, commissions of inquiry and public advocacy
by international officials.
Nevertheless, in addressing atrocity crimes
committed by non-State armed groups, we acknowledge
the emergence of new challenges, particularly those
related to the impact of new technologies. Some
modifications in the preventive and protective strategies
of all stakeholders may be required in that regard,
and Malaysia stands ready to work closely with other
Member States, regional organizations and civil society
in addressing, anticipating, preventing and responding
to such emerging threats and challenges. My delegation
notes that the international community’s capacity for
early warning and assessment of atrocity-crime risks
has significantly improved over the past few years.
Malaysia also sees merit in the three strategies outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report for strengthening early
action and early warning, which include reviewing and
strengthening existing preventive capacities, promoting
accountability and innovating by expanding civilian
action for atrocity prevention.
In that context, my delegation supports the idea
that prevention must become the rule rather than the
exception. The Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional and subregional organizations
can all enhance their contributions to the prevention of

atrocity crimes by demonstrating a greater willingness
to consider and respond to the earliest signs of risk. In
that respect, we join others in calling for restraint in
the use of the veto in the Security Council, especially
in cases of atrocity crimes. For practical reasons,
Malaysia is of the view that the exercise of the veto
should be regulated so as to enable the international
community to act promptly to save innocent people
from brutal atrocities.
In principle, Malaysia welcomes the noble
intentions that the responsibility to protect is intended
to accomplish. Nevertheless, we want to reiterate
that it requires continued, in-depth discussions to
enable the international community to clearly define
its understanding, applications, implementation and
effects on States on both the international and internal
fronts. Only through all Member States’ complete
understanding and systematic application of the
responsibility to protect do we believe that we can
truly accept it as an international norm. To that end,
Malaysia stands ready to work closely with the United
Nations and its Member States in developing options
to strengthen civilian action to prevent atrocity crimes.
Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of
this plenary meeting to address the responsibility to
protect, a topic of special importance. It is taking place
in a international context fraught with controversy
that demands that we strengthen the humanitarian
and international security norm conceived during the
2005 World Summit with a view to preventing the
worst kinds of war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
In the twentieth century, we witnessed the
degeneration of animosity and extreme nationalism
into cruel and degrading treatment during the two great
international conflagrations, resulting in frightful and
brutal crimes against entire populations, all based on
the common denominators of hatred and intolerance.
With time, the international community, represented in
the United Nations, has codified an international system
that prioritizes human rights law, international law and
international humanitarian law. The Assembly has
acknowledged that every State, as a society organized
on the basis of laws, bears the primary responsibility for
protecting its population and preventing atrocities such
as those we have witnessed in the past. That underscores
the genesis and relevance of the responsibility to protect
through its fulfilment today, a precept that is supported

through the fundamental purpose of the Charter of the
United Nations, which is both preventing the scourge of
war and promoting peace among peoples and nations.
From our perspective, the responsibility to protect
is a norm that fully corresponds to our constitutional
principles, as the State of Guatemala was established
and founded to protect individuals and families, and
its supreme purpose is achieving the common good.
In the year that marks the seventieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
responsibility to protect must be recognized as an
exemplary way to protect and defend populations from
mass atrocities. It must therefore be strengthened,
especially with the advent of new hotspots, where
we are unfortunately seeing similar patterns that in
the worst cases involve new crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing. In such instances, the Security
Council must act urgently and make effective use
of its methods of work and strategies to prevent
further acts of genocide or crimes against humanity,
in accordance with its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. In that
regard, my delegation is proud to be part of the code of
conduct initiative of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, aimed at preventing the use of the
veto in the Security Council in cases of genocide and
crimes against humanity, and we urge other States to
join in supporting it.
We therefore reiterate our call for upholding
international obligations under international law,
human rights law and refugee law, since protecting
the civilian population is an intrinsic part of them. In
that regard, Guatemala prides itself as a contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping in support of
the protection of civilians. We affirm that the principle
of the responsibility to protect is complemented by the
concept of sustainable peace, which prioritizes respect
for human rights, all based on a preventive approach
with a view to avoiding hostile confrontations.
Speaking in our national capacity, we would like to
say how pleased we are that the responsibility to protect
is on the agenda of the General Assembly at its seventysecond session, underscoring our political will to see
the issue discussed here. Accordingly, we support the
inclusion of this item on the General Assembly’s
permanent agenda, as a logical forum in which to
discuss its implementation as an exemplary mechanism
for protecting civilian populations from atrocities and
assuring them of their enjoyment of their human rights.

In conclusion, and based on our own experience,
we would like to take this opportunity to express
our rejection of and revulsion at practices that, while
they may not constitute genocide or crimes against
humanity, are certainly related to disrespect for basic
human rights, specifically the human rights of highly
vulnerable people such as migrant families and their
young children. We have watched dumbfounded in
the past few weeks as families and children have been
inhumanely and perversely separated from their parents,
a practice that has traumatic consequences for children,
leaving them in a situation of extreme vulnerability
and at risk for severe psychological and emotional
damage, with total disregard for their inalienable rights
as human beings. We call for an end to such practices,
which recall inhumane episodes of the past.
Mrs. Okey-Uche (Nigeria): I thank the President of
the General Assembly and the Secretary-General for their
important statements (see A/72/PV.99), and Australia
and Ghana for seeing to it that the responsibility to
protect is taking its rightful place on the agenda today. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/72/884) entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
early warning to early action”. Indeed, early warning
and early action could save the world from many of the
disasters we are currently experiencing. We therefore
agree with the recommendations in the report and
encourage everyone to see that they are implemented.
It has been nine years since the last — and first — formal
General Assembly debate on the responsibility to protect
in 2009 (see A/63/PV.97 to A/63/PV.101). My delegation
believes that the time is indeed ripe to reaffirm our
support for the commitments we made at the 2005 World
Summit with regard to the responsibility to protect.
With particular reference to paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome document (resolution
60/1), Nigeria would like to take this opportunity to
call for the full implementation of all three pillars of
the norm by reviewing and strengthening existing
preventive capacities where necessary, continuing
to encourage and promote accountability for atrocity
prevention, and innovating by expanding civilian action
for atrocity prevention and drawing on all available
resources to meet the pressing challenges.
The disturbing trend of mass atrocity crimes has
continued around the world, and it requires that we
work together at the national, regional and global levels
to halt the problem. We must get to the root of all the
issues ravaging our peoples, most especially civilians,

who are too often targeted. Some of the challenges
identified are weak structures and institutions, which
should be addressed. In that regard, we must enhance
multilateral cooperation in order to strengthen States’
capacities to deal with threats posed by violent conflicts
and crimes against humanity.
We urge the Security Council to make even greater
use of its situational-awareness briefings and the Arria
Formula mechanism, and to invite more briefers in
order to achieve greater effectiveness in preventing
mass atrocities through early warning and early action.
Furthermore, by strengthening cooperation with the
Human Rights Council, the Security Council could
achieve even greater gains in areas where populations
are at risk of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
or crimes against humanity. Nigeria also believes that
it is important to note the hard work of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect and to
commend their efforts so far. We also want to take
this opportunity to urge all Member States to uphold
their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law, which underpin the
commitment to the responsibility to protect. In that
regard, we encourage Member States that have not yet
ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide to do so
without further delay.
Another important area is the need for stronger
judicial institutions within States and cooperation
between States. Nigeria is a signatory to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which,
incidentally, will celebrate its twentieth anniversary on
17 July and remains an undeniably important body in
the battle to end impunity for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
We are also pleased to note that eight of the
current 14 United Nations peacekeeping operations
have protection-of-civilian mandates, and that the
responsibility to protect has been referenced directly
in a number of those mandates by the Security
Council, including in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan.
Another terrible source of harm to civilians in
conflict has been the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, as the Security Council has recognized
in its resolutions 2274 (2016), 2283 (2016), 2296 (2016)
and 2313 (2016). Every region of the world has suffered

from the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
particularly Africa. We must make use of international
instruments such as the Arms Trade Treaty, as they
can contribute greatly to protecting civilians and
preventing mass atrocities. The proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has helped fuel the terrorist
activities of Boko Haram in the north-east of Nigeria.
Though it has been seriously decimated, Boko Haram,
through its lone-wolf attacks, is still a challenge that we
are dealing with.
Nigeria condemns the growing number of deliberate
attacks on civilians, humanitarian workers, journalists
and peacekeepers across the world, which have occurred
everywhere, in markets, hospitals and schools. In that
regard, and as a demonstration of our commitment
to the cause and in line with the Secretary-General’s
earlier recommendations, Nigeria has appointed a
national focal point for the responsibility to protect and
set up a presidential committee on small arms and light
weapons to tackle the issue of their proliferation. The
Nigerian Army has also set up a human rights desk to
ensure that military operations respect their rules of
engagement. Furthermore, the Nigerian Government
has taken major steps to enhance security at camps
for internally displaced people in order to reduce their
vulnerability and promote their eventual safe return to
their homes and reintegration into society.
Nigeria has also gone far with demining activities,
the removal of improvised explosive devices and the
provision of military escorts for humanitarian workers.
In order to further forestall situations that could lead
to mass atrocity crimes, we have set up a presidential
initiative for the north-east. It is a comprehensive
recovery blueprint that integrates all actors and actions
in a coordinated set of activities aimed at north-eastern
Nigeria’s rapid recovery from the havoc caused by the
Boko Haram insurgents. The Nigerian Government
has also launched a safe schools initiative to provide
safe education in conflict-affected areas of the northeast and has endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration,
under which we are committed to implementing the
guidelines for protecting schools and universities from
military use during armed conflict. Narratives that
support violence are also being countered in schools,
with ongoing efforts to deradicalize convicted or
repentant terrorists by deploying emergency teams
of psychosocial counsellors and health professionals.
Work is also being done with the communities affected
through various economic revitalization programmes

aimed at the people most affected by terrorism and
violent extremism.
In conclusion, we all have a responsibility to protect
one another, which is why we are united as nations. Our
hope is that we will collectively identify implementable
strategies that can effectively prevent atrocities and
protect populations around the world. We believe we
are on the right track.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, and the Secretariat for
organizing this meeting. I would also like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(A/72/884) on the responsibility to protect and on the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. I would like to address
the following points with regard to the subject of
today’s meeting.
The delegation of Egypt reaffirms that the basic
responsibility for protecting nations from grave
crimes falls to Member States, and that the national
and international work to prevent those crimes must
be based on supporting national efforts to expose
and prevent such crimes by national law-enforcement
bodies in conflict and post-conflict situations. The
implementation of the concept of the responsibility to
protect is a basic responsibility of States. It is important
to ensure respect for the principles of international law,
particularly those of the sovereignty and equality of
States. In that regard, I would like to emphasize that
the role of the international community should be
limited to a complementary one helping States to fulfil
their commitments. International interventions should
be an exceptional measure of last resort, and should
be conducted in full compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations. We also stress the importance of
ensuring that the concept is not allowed to expand
during implementation.
Egypt would like to emphasize the importance of
respecting the hierarchy of the implementation of the
norm’s pillars. We cannot move from one pillar to another
until the possibilities of the first have been completely
exhausted. The first pillar is Member States’ inherent
responsibility for protecting their civilians from severe
violations. The second consists in the effort to use all
possible diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful
ways to protect people from atrocities before seeking
the international community’s assistance in adopting a
collective position that accords with the Charter of the

United Nations, including Chapter VII. In that regard,
we would like to reaffirm that as far as the responsibility
to protect is concerned, any international strategy must
have the broad support of Member States in order to
exclude any doubts about the impartiality of those
strategies or the possibility that they could be seen as
a way to interfere in a State’s internal affairs. We must
therefore avoid relying on initiatives or strategies that
do not enjoy consensus and that have been developed
outside intergovernmental frameworks, including the
Human Rights Up Front initiative and the Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.
While we agree with the noble objectives on which
the concept of the responsibility to protect is based, and
remain committed to the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (resolution 60/1), including paragraphs 138
and 139, the problem is the concept’s ambiguity. Its
essence is still an expanded political concept, and it is
not yet a specifically designated legal concept, so that the
scope of its applicability is not yet defined. Considering
those basic political and legal gaps in the concept of the
responsibility to protect, we believe we still need more
time for dialogue and discussions in order to respond
to the concerns of all Member States and address
those gaps. We should establish a clear perception that
enjoys consensus. We cannot possibly begin to develop
a mechanism for implementing the responsibility to
protect before we have a clear and specific definition
of the concept itself. In that respect, and in line with
our belief in the importance of a dialogue on this issue,
Egypt has participated constructively and positively
in the meetings of the relevant informal interactive
dialogue of the General Assembly.
In conclusion, it is clear from all of this that we
still have a lot of work to do in order to clarify this
concept and ensure that it complies with the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law. We believe that this clarification is essential if we
are to include the responsibility to protect as an item
on the agenda of the General Assembly. We therefore
oppose its inclusion on the agenda without developing
and agreeing on a specific definition. In that respect,
we hope to continue the informal interactive dialogue
in order to close the legal and political gaps with
regard to the concept before including it on the agenda
of the General Assembly or taking any steps towards
its implementation.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium associates itself with the statement

made by the observer of the European Union, as well as
that made by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (see
A/72/PV.99). I would now like to make a few comments
in my national capacity.
Belgium welcomes the holding of this formal debate
on the responsibility to protect, the first in almost 10
years. During the 2005 World Summit, all Heads of
State and Government of Member States agreed to
protect their peoples from the crime of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
They also decided to take action in order to uphold
that responsibility. At a time when the victims of mass
atrocities continue to number in the thousands, it is more
than ever our duty not to forget those commitments.
This meeting and our discussions today are certainly
a step in that direction. In 2005, our representatives
also stressed that the General Assembly should
continue to consider the responsibility to protect and its
implications. I would also like to take this opportunity
to sincerely thank Australia and Ghana for proposing
almost a year ago now that this item be included on the
Assembly’s agenda during the current session.
We are obviously aware of the differences in
approach to the practical implementation of the
responsibility to protect. That pertains in particular
the second and third pillars of the concept, which are
an integral part of the commitments we have made.
However, it is precisely the fact that the approaches
differ that should encourage us to maintain a continuing
dialogue on the subject. That is why Belgium fully
supports the proposal already made by other delegations
that the issue of the responsibility to protect be included
as a permanent item on the agenda of the Assembly.
I would like to welcome the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884).
The emphasis on prevention and the primary
responsibility of States for protecting people from
atrocity crimes is paramount. State sovereignty is not
an obstacle to the responsibility to protect. On the
contrary, they are two mutually reinforcing concepts.
As the Secretary-General underscored in his report,
the United Nations system already has many tools at its
disposal to identify early-warning signs of situations
that could lead to atrocity crimes. I am thinking in
particular of the special procedures established by
the Human Rights Council, but also of the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect.

Early-warning systems could include, for example,
regular meetings at which the Special Advisers of
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect could present the
information they collect to the Security Council
and other relevant United Nations bodies and make
recommendations for concrete action. In any case,
the role of the Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect is crucial, which is why Belgium urges the
Secretary-General to appoint a successor as soon as
possible to Mr. Šimonović, whose outstanding work
we commend.
While essential, prevention is unfortunately not
enough. In that regard, I would again refer to the 2005
World Summit Outcome document (resolution 60/1). The
World Summit participants stated at the time that when
States are unable to fulfil their responsibility to protect
their people or when a country’s national authorities have
clearly failed to protect their people, the international
community must take action. More specifically, at the
Summit the Member States highlighted the role that
the Security Council could play in certain cases. In
that regard, Belgium believes that the Council should
ensure that the protection of civilians is given priority
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations. In the
same spirit, the aspects related to the rule of law in
the mandates of political and peacekeeping missions
should also be strengthened and systematized, taking
into account the specific situations of each mission.
Combating impunity must also be a priority. That
responsibility falls first and foremost to each State. It
means that they have an obligation to prosecute the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes, wherever they
may be, in order to ensure that they do not escape justice.
States that have not yet ratified the most recent version
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
should do so. However, the Security Council must also
strengthen its support to national judicial procedures
and hybrid mechanisms, as well as the International
Criminal Court, particularly with regard to the situations
it has referred to it. In view of the Council’s failure to
act, we also welcome the role played by the General
Assembly in creating the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Finally,
when mass atrocities occur, the Security Council must
not allow disagreements among its permanent members

to result in inaction. Its credibility as a key actor in
maintaining international peace and security is at
stake. That is why Belgium supports the initiative of
France and Mexico to regulate the right of the veto in
the event of atrocity crimes, and why we also support
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group.
In conclusion, the commitments we made in
2005 with regard to the responsibility to protect are
ambitious. In the past few years, the annual reports
of the Secretary-General, several General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, the work of the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Responsibility to Protect, the tools and instruments
developed at the national and regional levels and the
activities of many civil-society organizations have all
contributed to a better understanding of how we can
implement that responsibility. It is time to begin a new
chapter and take action so that we can avoid continually
mourning new tragedies.
The Acting President: The representative of India
has asked to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I

would like to remind members that statements in the
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and five minutes for the second,
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Bayyapu (India): While we are having this
serious debate for the first time in a decade on an issue
that is important to all of us, we have seen one delegation
yet again misuse this platform to make an unwarranted
reference to the situation in the Indian state of Jammu
and Kashmir. Such cynical attempts have failed in the
past and have no support in this body.
I would like to place it on record and reiterate that
the state of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral and
inalienable part of India. No amount of empty rhetoric
from Pakistan will change that reality.
The Acting President: We will hear the remaining
speakers in the debate on Tuesday, 2 July at 10 a.m. in
the Trusteeship Council Chamber.
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

