Seventy-third session

96

th plenary meeting
Friday, 28 June 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beleffi (San
Marino), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 168 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (А/73/898)
Mr. Moussa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank the President for her wise
stewardship in convening this meeting. My delegation
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/898) entitled “The responsibility to protect:
lessons learned for prevention”.
Contemporary history has taught us harsh lessons
about the humanitarian tragedies that might have been
the result of hate messaging, racism and fascism leading
to dehumanizing the other, discrimination against the
other, violations of the rights of the other and even
attacks on the right to life. Historically, such practices
have always led to events of genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and massacres of all forms in
all kinds of contexts — religious, ethnic or racial.
In that regard, Egypt renews its support for the
content of the outcome document of the 2005 World
Summit whereby every State commits to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. We believe that this

is appropriate in order to address grave international
atrocities that originate from hatred within States and
then worsen and evolve to turn into real crimes at a
time when the international community and the United
Nations have not truly taken up their responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations.
My delegation believes that the ideal way to deal
with this thorny issue is to focus efforts on closing
the real gaps that have been revealed by historical
tragedies. At the same time, we must not waste efforts
by trying to develop the concept of the responsibility to
protect (R2P) in a way that runs counter to the current
international consensus. Doing so could threaten the
sovereignty of States and the principles of international
law, in particular the sovereign equality of States and
the prohibition of interference in internal affairs. We
believe that such an expansionist approach is a source
of concern. It undermines international consensus on
the very basis of the concept. It also leads to unfocused
efforts and to politicizing the issue while slowing down
United Nations involvement in dealing with these
atrocities. That in turn can only lead to more thousands
of victims, as history has well taught us.
In that regard, we once again stress the fact that the
R2P concept is quite clear in the Charter of the United
Nations and the mechanisms of this international
organization. There is therefore no need to reinvent the
wheel, so to speak, or to expand the interpretation of
the concept. All we need is national political will on
the part of States and the collective will of the entire
international community and the United Nations, as
set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

The fundamental responsibility to protect populations
against atrocities falls on Member States. National and
international efforts to prevent atrocities must focus
on strengthening national capabilities to prevent such
crimes, including by supporting national jurisdictions
in cases of conflict and in post-conflict situations. We
must respect the hierarchy of implementing the three
main pillars pertaining to R2P, where collective work is
the last resort, in line with the United Nations Charter.
We would like to question those States that included
this item on the agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session about its continued inclusion
on the agenda of the current session despite the
understanding at the time that the item would not be
inscribed on the agendas of future sessions. At the
previous session, my delegation, supported by many
others, stressed the need for the item not to be included
on the agenda of the current session until agreement
was reached on a clear and agreed understanding of the
R2P concept.
While we welcome the continuation of informal
consultations in that regard, we believe that the
continued inclusion of this item on the agenda, against
the prevailing understanding and in the absence of other
developments, would only weaken the international
consensus. Furthermore, it would lead to a lack of
focus on the real obstacles in dealing with those
atrocities and their causes, whether at the national or
international level.
I would like to mention the escalating xenophobia,
hate speech against immigrants and, in particular,
Islamophobia that in some countries have led to a
number of terrorist acts, targeting particular groups of
civilians whose only crime was to be the other. In a
way, that is in line with all forms of ethnic cleansing.
We appeal to all States to take appropriate measures
to prevent the perpetration of such atrocities in future.
Experience teaches us that, through proper
preparation and a genuine desire to achieve real
consensus, we can enhance the United Nations system
to defend citizens of all groups. Perhaps one of the most
important examples in that regard is Security Council
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of health-care
workers and health facilities in armed conflict, which
Egypt, joined by a number of States, drafted during
Egypt’s presidency of the Council in 2016. We believe
that this is the best way to deal with the R2P issue.

Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I appreciate the convening of this plenary meeting
on an issue of great importance that requires serious
and thorough analysis by the General Assembly. I
would also like to convey my gratitude, through the
President, to the Secretary-General for his report on the
responsibility to protect (А/73/898), which focuses on
lessons learned for prevention.
The State of Ecuador believes that the responsibility
to protect is an issue that cannot be taken lightly.
Although the concept has a humanitarian basis, it is
also true that it must be implemented based on premises
that do not undermine the guarantees and sovereignty
of States
Ecuador supported the adoption of resolution
60/1 in 2005, which endorsed by consensus the 2005
World Summit Outcome document, which clearly
established the pillars that should underpin the idea of
the responsibility to protect. Pillar I identifies the State
as the entity with the primary role of protecting its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. Pillar II emphasizes
the role to be played by the international community
through cooperation and the provision of assistance in
order to enable States to build local capacity that will
enable them to meet their responsibilities. And pillar III
enables the international community to take collective
measures, in accordance with the norms and procedures
established in the Charter of the United Nations — that
is, through the Security Council — in accordance with
Chapters VI and VII of the Charter.
The Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador sets
out, as a fundamental principle of coexistence, the
need to guarantee full respect for human rights and
the obligation of States to fight for their realization.
We therefore believe that pillars I, II and III should be
implemented in strict accord with national policy and in
chronological sequence, with priority always accorded
to the pillars I and II, on the understanding that pillar
III, and any eventual use of force, should come into play
only in exceptional circumstances and as a last resort.
Ecuador has adopted mechanisms to prevent
atrocity crimes. In doing so it included in its 2008
Constitution and national legislation no statute of
limitation for prosecuting and penalizing crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, forced
disappearance of persons and crimes of aggression. In
our country none of those cases is eligible for amnesty.

With the same commitment, the Government of Ecuador
signed the code of conduct for the Security Council to
respond in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes.
Moreover, we agree with the Secretary-General that
the responsibility to protect is a universal principle. That
is why we have supported every regional and subregional
initiative that would encourage Governments to
assume their responsibilities emanating from relevant
international treaties and to identify and address points
of friction in their societies before they lead to violent
situations or atrocities.
We take note of the balance struck in the report on
the importance of examining the practices I mentioned,
the lessons of which aim to strengthen preventive
measures and initiatives, including the role played by
States and the international community in that regard.
We reiterate that only the General Assembly has the
legal capacity and authority to define the responsibility
to protect and, more specifically, to identify the
conceptual, institutional and political dimensions of the
task of its implementation. The responsibility to protect
is a concept that requires further analysis and discussion
among the States Members of the Organization. That
is why last year Ecuador voted in favour of including
this topic on the agenda of the General Assembly at this
session, with a view to constructively, in a transparent
manner and without politicizing the dialogue make
progress towards an agreement that will, as an ultimate
goal, guarantee the protection of civilians in all places
where atrocity crimes are committed.
Ecuador emphasizes that the prevention of conflicts
through the peaceful settlement of disputes is the best
way to prevent the commission of atrocity crimes. The
best way to prevent conflicts and the most expeditious
way to strengthen national capacities lies in building
trust — trust in both the law and international public
law, as well as in the application, respectability
and accountability of the institutions established to
implement it.
With regard to accountability, we want to highlight
the role played by the International Criminal Court in
the maintenance of international peace and justice, in
safeguarding the rule of law and as an essential element
in conflict prevention and the provision of reparations
to the victims of the most serious crimes. We also
believe that the numerous initiatives and commitments
generated by this forum, such as the recent United

Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech and
the fight against violence and sexual violence, and the
search for the root causes of conflicts should be joined
together as important mechanisms to complement the
responsibility to protect.
Lastly, we reiterate our confidence in the role played
by regional and subregional organizations in preventing
conflicts and the commission of atrocity crimes. We
attach high value to early-warning mechanisms to avoid
the deterioration of the situation of a country and avert
the outbreak of crises and violence against the civilian
population, the most vulnerable of whom are generally
the most affected.
Mr. Horna (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this debate on the
responsibility to protect, the thematic focus of which
is the lessons learned for prevention. In that regard, we
appreciate the corresponding report of the SecretaryGeneral (А/73/898).
Peru, current member of the Security Council and
the Human Rights Council, supports the consolidation
of the principle of the responsibility to protect. By
reaffirming that the responsibility falls primarily on
States, we view this formal debate as a step towards
consensus, with the recognition that such a principle is
not designed to undermine, but rather to reinforce, State
sovereignty. That means that, when national authorities
fail to protect their populations, the international
community has a responsibility, under the Charter of
the United Nations, to take measures to protect the
most vulnerable.
Peru is committed to the full enforcement of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We are a party to the fundamental
instruments in both fields and our authorities ensure
their proper implementation, including through the
continued training of our armed forces. We have also
adopted several initiatives to guarantee the proper
conduct of Peruvian troops deployed in peacekeeping
operations. However, we wish to express our deep regret
and concern at the impunity with which international
humanitarian law is violated in today’s world, in many
cases without the Security Council being up to the role
upon which it is called to fulfil.
We therefore stress that it is the obligation of the
members of the Security Council and the organized
international community to act with unity in order to
put an end to the suffering that for various reasons

affects millions of people across different regions of
the world. In that regard, we wish to emphasize that 119
States, including Peru, have signed a code of conduct
that obliges us to act promptly and decisively to prevent
and put an end to the most serious crimes. Peru also
supports the French-Mexican initiative to restrict the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. We also
take due note of the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General’s report and propose to make
diversity a strength and not a weakness in order to
guarantee access to justice, defend the rule of law and
consolidate the guarantees of non-recurrence.
We underscore that the most effective means of
protection is through prevention. In that respect, we
wish to highlight the importance of understanding
sustainable peace as a permanent objective focused
on human beings and institutions. That, together with
full respect for fundamental freedoms, represents the
basic premise for achieving peaceful and inclusive
societies that are free of impunity. We must therefore
promote proper accountability mechanisms. In addition
to supporting the work of the International Criminal
Court, we express our support for all initiatives aimed
at ensuring that perpetrators of atrocities are held
accountable for the crimes committed. We therefore
welcome the progress made with regard to the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the prosecution of crimes in Syria; the Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant; and the
mechanism for accountability in Myanmar.
We wish to conclude by reiterating Peru’s
commitment to the responsibility to protect and by
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General’s
Special Advisers for their work.
Ms. French (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to participate in this debate on
the responsibility to protect (R2P).
We continue to support the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document and believe that each individual
State has the responsibility to protect its populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. We applaud the work of
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
Ms. Karen Smith, and encourage the General Assembly
to consider making this debate an annual agenda
item. We recommend that the Secretary-General more
closely examine the impact of human rights violations

and abuses, including sexual violence, as key earlywarning indicators in his 2020 report.
The United States recognizes that there are vital
interests in protecting populations from mass atrocities.
Our December 2017 national security strategy
highlighted the importance of holding perpetrators
of genocide and mass atrocities accountable. On
14 January, the Elie Wiesel Genocide and Atrocities
Prevention Act came into law, reaffirming the United
States commitment to preventing and responding to
atrocities. That legislation highlights the importance of
a coordinated, whole-of-Government approach in order
to strengthen our Governments ability to forecast,
prevent and respond to mass atrocities.
In support of early warning and prevention, the
Department of State conducts regular analysis of global
atrocity risks and a deeper analysis focused on highrisk countries that are susceptible to atrocities. In order
to address atrocity risks, the United States Government
identifies gaps in existing diplomatic and programmatic
activities and formulates recommendations and policy
options. The United States is engaged in preventative
work, too. In early June, we unveiled the United
States strategy on women and peace and security,
a Government-wide framework that articulates the
United States commitment to promoting the meaningful
participation of women in efforts to respond to
conflict. Through women’s meaningful participation in
mediation efforts and preventative work, we can avert
atrocities before they happen.
The United States continues to play an active role
in the Global Network of R2P Focal Points and was
pleased to participate in recent meetings in Brussels.
We continue to support best practices in the prevention
space. The United States has also been a strong
supporter of the Human Rights Up Front initiative since
its inception. The initiative is a valuable convening
mechanism to ensure a whole-of-United Nations
approach to prevention with regard to human rights
abuses and violations. Given that human rights abuses
and violations are often an early-warning indicator of
mass atrocities, we encourage Member States to engage
further in the work of the Third Committee. Member
States can deliver statements on the Third Committee’s
agenda items during interactive dialogues with the
special rapporteurs, such as the Special Rapporteur for
freedom of expression and the Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights defenders.

The United States Government supports a range of
efforts that both directly and indirectly reduce the risks
of mass atrocities. Such efforts include establishing
and training local communities to use early-warning
systems, supporting criminal justice system reform
and documenting human rights abuses for justice and
accountability processes. In one example, we surveyed
and documented human rights violations and abuses
against the Rohingya in 2017, in a time sensitive and
comprehensive manner. The data collected is bolstering
current efforts to pursue accountability for those
responsible for atrocities and to contribute to justice for
the victims.
We commend the Secretary-General’s efforts to
better coordinate within the United Nations system to
prevent atrocities, and we are pleased to support this
formal debate. Moving forward, we will continue to
look for opportunities to integrate prevention efforts
across the United Nations system.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
making reference to the 2009 report of the SecretaryGeneral on this subject, which asserts that:
“The task ahead is not to reinterpret or renegotiate
the conclusions of the World Summit but to find
ways of implementing its decisions in a fully
faithful and consistent manner.” (A/63/677, para. 2)
Yet, precisely 10 years after the report, that
particular assertion still has validity in our present time.
My delegation has been engaged in various debates on
this topic, whether under this agenda item or different
settings in the halls of the Organization. A divergence of
views still exists regarding this concept. Nevertheless,
my delegation is also cognizant and appreciative of
the efforts to operationalize the concept and meet the
noble objectives and purposes that it is intended to
serve. Needless to say, there are also stringent views
regarding how to forge a clear and practical modality
for that concept, and in fact, whether it should stand as
an agenda item at all.
In that connection, allow me to recall our position
that the inclusion of this topic as a one-off agenda item
at the seventy-second session of the General Assembly
would be an option for the purpose of enriching
the knowledge of States Members of the United
Nations concerning the strengthening of the primary
responsibility of States. My delegation would therefore
continue to insist that deliberation on this topic should
be on the basis of consensus so that any process that we

choose to advance is one that garners collective support
and ownership, and not the imposition of the few or
even the majority. Against that backdrop, I would like
to make the following points.
First, a few divergent views do exist, particularly
on pillar III, and that requires a careful approach. But,
at the same time, we cannot be complacent with what
we have achieved with pillars I and II. That atrocities
and conflicts are still continuously occurring in many
parts of the world is clear evidence of the lack of
prevention and early-warning mechanism efforts by
the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations
already provides the tools to take such steps, and we
need to exhaust them.
Secondly, the openness of the concept should be in
line with the provisions of the United Nations Charter
that promote peaceful and appropriate diplomatic means,
as well as non-coercive measures. The concept of the
responsibility to protect does not provide justifications
for unilateral action. It reinforces the primacy of
multilateralism, as embodied in the United Nations
Charter, for the assumption of that responsibility.
Thirdly, any effort to establish links between
violations of human rights and the presumed imminence
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity should be forged carefully so as to
avoid creating criteria or thresholds that are expansive
or intrusive and could be misleading.
There are indeed divergent views on the practicality
and operationalization of this concept. The politicization
of the concept will only widen such divergence. Instead,
we should focus on concrete cooperation to help build
capacity in the exchange of views and learn from each
other’s experiences. My delegation remains prepared to
positively engage in the discussion of this concept with
the objective of reaching consensus and achieving the
collective engagement of all Member States.
Mr. Cuellar Torres (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The Republic of Colombia thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report entitled “Responsibility to
protect: lessons learned for prevention” (A/73/898). The
report makes an appropriate assessment of the measures
that each State and the international community can
take to comply with their preventive responsibilities,
based on best practices since the adoption of the 2005
United Nations World Summit Outcome document on
the responsibility to protect. The series of practical
suggestions based on the experiences over the past

decade serve as a call to action to prevent atrocity
crimes and other very serious phenomena that activate
the concept of the responsibility to protect.
Colombia is not oblivious to the consequences of
violence. We therefore recognize the importance of
taking all the necessary measures to avoid and prevent
the commission of the most serious crimes for the
international community as a whole. The world is aware
of the efforts that we have made — and will continue
to make — to promote peace not just in Colombia but
throughout the world.
The need to strengthen the rule of law and ensure
accountability for atrocity crimes committed in the past
is a fundamental guarantee to prevent the repetition of
such crimes. Colombia is aware of that, and through
the implementation of the General Agreement for
the Termination of the Conflict and the Construction
of a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in 2016, as a
component of the objectives enshrined in our peace law
policy, we have implemented a series of mechanisms of
the comprehensive system of truth, justice, reparation
and non-repetition, with a view to guaranteeing victims
their rights and the fulfilment of the commitments
made under international law, including sanctions
proportional to the gravity of the crimes committed.
In 2011, as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, Colombia took a favourable stance
on measures that seek to protect the civilian population
from imminent attacks from a Government that,
through its actions and statements, has shown that it
is not up to the task of the international responsibility
it has to protect its people. As a result, we believe
that it is necessary for all Member States to comply
with our duties under international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law, while
keeping the doors open for those who are fleeing a lack
of protection and seeking to meet their most basic needs.
In that regard, I highlight Colombia’s support for
Switzerland’s proposal to reform the Rome Statute in
order to add the starvation of a population as a war
crime in non-international armed conflicts. That illegal,
immoral and criminal practice, which, unfortunately, is
still being used in different regions of the world, must
be eradicated and prosecuted wherever it is committed.
To conclude, I would like to underpin two points
that my country believes are equally important for the
prevention of atrocities.

On the one hand, we emphasize that the Sustainable
Development Goals are an opportunity to create a more
sustainable and peaceful future. In that context, we view
the role of Sustainable Development Goal 16, on peace,
justice and strong institutions, as especially relevant.
President Duque Márquez is committed to providing
all Colombians a secure and legitimate peace. That
means guaranteeing legality by strengthening the rule
of law and physical and legal safeties and securities,
stimulating entrepreneurship and the generation of new
wealth and broadening Colombians’ access to equitable
social welfare. That is our best weapon to prevent
atrocity crimes, to which we have been no stranger.
On the other hand, Colombia insists on the leading
role that women have in the prevention of atrocity
crimes as a key element for early warning, the promotion
of cooperation and building capacities and support
networks at the local, regional and international levels.
We cannot change the events of the past, but we can
do everything within our grasp to prevent more serious
crimes from being committed in our world.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): At the outset, we
would like to thank the Secretary-General for this
year’s report on the responsibility to protect (R2P),
with a special emphasis on lessons learned for
prevention (A/73/898). This discussion on R2P serves
as yet further confirmation of its importance for the
international community. It is difficult to overestimate
its significance in the light of the persistent, and
sometimes widening, gap between the commitments
and actions of some United Nations States Members.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
yesterday on behalf of the European Union (see A/73/
PV.93). We would like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.
Ukraine is a party to the core instruments of
international law relating to the prevention of atrocity
crimes, the protection of populations, upholding human
rights and the elimination of all forms of discrimination.
We removed internal legal obstacles in the way of
Ukraine’s ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and are actively working
on the preparation of legislation aimed at implementing
the Statute.
The R2P principles fully exclude any possibility of
the use of military forces by one State against another
State under the pretext of the protection of its population
from imagined threats with the actual sole goal of

annexing another State’s territory. There are criteria
for the legitimacy of the use of force, such as just cause,
the right intention, as a last resort, the proportionality
of means and a reasonable prospect of success. What is
important to highlight is that military force must not be
used to alter borders or pursue occupation.
Nevertheless, the exploitation of R2P in violation of
the Charter of the United Nations principles continues
to take place. The military actions of the Russian
Federation in Ukraine, under the sociocultural pretext
of protecting Russian-speaking Ukrainians, are a clear
example of that. It is nothing more than a crude and
unsuccessful attempt of employing certain elements of
R2P to justify its armed aggression.
The General Assembly, in its resolutions in relation
to the Russian-Ukrainian conflict, has affirmed its
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders and has condemned
the temporary occupation of the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol by the Russian
Federation. The adoption of those resolutions means
that the United Nations family is not going to tolerate
the manipulation of R2P principles.
Russia’s supply of weapons and ammunition to its
armed formations in occupied Ukrainian Donbas and
their daily attacks and shelling, which threaten the
lives of the civilian population, are crimes under the
principle of R2P. The ongoing occupation of parts of
its territory limits Ukraine’s ability to implement R2P
pillar I.
The Russian occupation regime continues to deny
access to international human rights observers in
Crimea, including the United Nations Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. In the context of
today’s discussion, it is worth mentioning that human
rights and humanitarian presence constitute a critical
part of a prevention mechanism, which, in addition
to monitoring, can also identify risks of a sharp
deterioration of the situation and make respective
recommendations for early action.
In that regard, we again urge the Russian Federation
to reverse the occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol, as
well as territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
and to stop its aggression, including by withdrawing
its armed formations from the temporarily occupied
territories and fully implementing its commitments
under the Minsk agreements. In addition, we urge the

release of Ukrainian military servicemen and naval
vessels, as well as all political prisoners held in Russia
and in occupied Crimea and Donbas.
Turning to pillar II, and especially pillar III, we
would like to highlight the role of the United Nations,
through its organs, in preventing atrocity crimes. A
special responsibility for that rests with the Security
Council. However, the use of the veto, or even the
mere threat of its use, can stall the Council’s response
in situations where urgent action is needed to protect
civilians. In that regard, we would like to reiterate our
strong position on the need to phase out the veto, as a
major obstacle to the Council’s ability to act efficiently
in certain situations.
We have supported all kinds of ideas against the
misuse or abuse of the veto power. For instance, we
fully share the respective French-Mexican initiative
and the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group’s code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. However, we are also convinced that the
use of the veto should also be restricted in cases when
a permanent member is directly involved in a conflict
under consideration by the Council or if it is a party to
a dispute, and therefore cannot be expected to exercise
its voting rights and privileges in an impartial manner.
Nevertheless, in the current state of affairs, it
is quite possible that the Security Council will again
fail to act as it did on too many occasions already.
Therefore, the General Assembly should be ready
to assume its responsibility and play its role. In that
regard, strengthened and improved awareness on the
part of Member States regarding the risks of atrocity
crimes, recommendations on the prevention of such
crimes and mechanisms to support such steps could
greatly enhance the General Assembly’s ability to take
fair, just, efficient and results-oriented decisions in the
proper implementation of R2P.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will begin my statement in a less than
traditional way, with some words of regret. We regret
the fact that, for the second year in a row, debates on this
issue have been moved to the General Assembly through
a vote. The interactive dialogue format that prevailed
prior to 2018 has been relegated to the past, and with it
opportunities to discuss and reconcile positions. There
was a time when the older United Nations elites would
say that if you want to make an idea boring, drown it in

the routine of national statements; if you want to kill an
idea, refuse all compromise and put it to a vote. We see
a similar situation here with the unfortunate concept of
the responsibility to protect (R2P).
We note the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/73/898) on this topic. Like previous
reports, we view it strictly through the lens of the
relevant chapter of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document. We share the general view on the need to
prevent genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, which runs throughout the
Secretary-General’s report. That is the right idea. It
was first proposed by States in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document. However, over time the idea has
been interpreted in too many different ways. Today the
substance of the concept of R2P has been degraded.
We regret the fact that the Secretary-General’s report
does not reflect the full spectrum of approaches taken.
We are guided by the fact that reports must include a
description of the current status of discussions on the
concept, a list of all perspectives and, crucially, all
contentious elements on which States must agree.
I had planned to end my statement here, but I am
unable to do so. Just before I spoke, the representative of
Ukraine took the floor and again levelled accusations at
my country, with his hackneyed theories of occupation,
aggression and other crimes and mortal sins. It must be
understood that this is a country that includes among
the ranks of its national heroes Nazi cronies such as and
Roman Shukhevych and Stepan Bandera; where every
year a torch-bearing ceremony is held similar to the
one in Nazi Germany in 1939; and where soldiers draw
swastikas on their helmets. It is a country whose former
President took photographs of himself with his soldiers
in the background bearing symbols of Schutzstaffel
squadrons. It is country that burned its own citizens
and, during a talk show, those events were applauded by
Ukrainians in an auditorium. As such, this country has
no right to level accusations at the Russian Federation.
Regrettably, Ukraine now needs at least three things:
denazification, demilitarization and democratization. It
needs real democratization, and not just colourful gay
parades in the central squares of Kyiv.
Mrs. Udida (Nigeria): Let me begin by thanking
the President for convening this important meeting on
the responsibility to protect (R2P).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Denmark on behalf

of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
(see A/73/PV.93).
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(A/73/898) and its emphasis on early warning and
early action.
Allow me to use this opportunity to acknowledge
the tireless efforts of Ms. Karen Smith, Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to
Protect, and Mr. Adama Dieng, Under-SecretaryGeneral and Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide, to mainstream R2P
within the United Nations system, including through
the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.
Nigeria welcomes the inclusion of the responsibility
to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity on the
formal agenda of the General Assembly at its seventythird session.
My delegation agrees with the Secretary General’s
report in that concerted action makes a difference. We
support the role of regional and subregional organizations
in advancing the concept of the responsibility to protect.
As appropriately reflected in the Secretary-General’s
report, there are several instances where the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African States
and the United Nations have worked in unison to avert
the escalation of tensions, including those spelled out in
the responsibility to protect. We urge the international
community to continue to support such regional and
subregional endeavours so as to enable them to play
a more effective role in protecting populations and
providing early warning and early action to prevent the
commission of atrocious crimes. Nigeria supports the
efforts of the Secretary-General to maintain this issue
on the agenda of the General Assembly.
The international community is aware of the Boko
Haram terrorist organization’s mindless destruction and
mass atrocities in Nigeria and the Lake Chad and Sahel
regions, which have resulted in the forced displacement
of people in the affected areas over the years. Already,
substantive progress is being made through the
renewed cooperation and strategic combined counterterrorism operations of Nigeria and its immediate
neighbours under the auspices of the Lake Chad
Basin Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko
Haram. To address the negative impacts of terrorist
acts, Nigeria has adopted an integrated and holistic
approach to both forced displacement and conflict-

affected populations, anchored on four pillars: the safe,
dignified and voluntary return and resettlement of the
displaced population; reconciliation, peacebuilding
and community cohesion; local governance and citizen
engagement; and community, security, justice, human
rights and small arms control.
Nigeria believes that national Governments and
the international community must do more to curb
hate speech, especially in the media, as it can lead
to the violation of human rights and mass atrocity
crimes, as witnessed in Rwanda against the Tutsis
and in Myanmar against the Rohingya. Nigeria will
continue to join like-minded countries in emphasizing
the need to prevent atrocity crimes within the broader
context of human rights protection, particularly at the
Human Rights Council. Nigeria reiterates the need for
all Member States to uphold their obligations under
international human rights law, humanitarian law and
refugee law, which underpins the commitment to the
responsibility to protect. Nigeria is committed to the
human rights instruments and supports all strategies
at the regional and international levels to promote and
protect human rights.
Nigeria subjected itself for review for the
third time, through the Universal Periodic Review
process. Since the previous review, civil-military
cooperation in the fight against terrorism, insurgency
and other internal security operations has been
strengthened through several measures, including

the incorporation of modules on international human
rights and international human rights law in the
training curriculum for the military. Let me avail
myself of this opportunity to reiterate our commitment
to implementing the recommendations we adopted
during the latest Universal Periodic Review process
and state that Nigeria will continue to cooperate with
human rights treaty bodies to address risk factors more
systematically, as well as strengthen national efforts.
We are committed to the implementation of our legal
and institutional frameworks to alleviate the suffering
of the most vulnerable people in our society, especially
women, girls and children, from the impact of terrorist
attacks. Policy interventions targeted at improving the
social status of women, improving women’s economic
base, ensuring girl-child education and consolidating
their political rights are already in place.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Nigeria’s
commitment to the responsibility to protect initiative
and provide assurance of Nigeria’s readiness to deepen
cooperation and dialogue with a view to protecting
lives and properties within its territory.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 168.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

