Seventy-third session

94

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 27 June 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Santos Maraver
(Spain), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 168 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/898)
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly for convening this debate, and we also
welcome the recently published report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/73/898) entitled “Responsibility to protect:
lessons learned for prevention”.
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect (R2P), of which we are a part (see A/73/PV.93).
I would like to recall that from the outset Chile has
supported the concept of R2P in the terms established
by the Heads of State and Government in paragraphs
138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document. In that regard, we reaffirm our commitment
and are gratified by the inclusion of R2P in the formal
agenda of the present session of the General Assembly,
where we support its inclusion as a permanent item.
The responsibility to protect is based on three
mutually supporting and fundamental pillars, which
need not be applied in any particular order. In that regard,

we firmly believe that the pillars of the responsibility to
protect are so intertwined that, in practice, they cannot
be applied sequentially. On the contrary, they form part
of an indivisible and non-exclusive whole. We therefore
call for the full and consistent implementation of its
three pillars, which is necessary if we are to prevent the
commission of the greatest evils.
The importance of conflict prevention efforts
cannot be overemphasized, as set forth in the first pillar
of the responsibility to protect. The role of women in
prevention is also critical. In the same vein, the joint
and coordinated work of the various institutions and
mechanisms of the Organization, including with regional
organizations, is essential. Nevertheless, we must not
forget the responsibility of States, the first ones called
upon to develop policies and actions for the building of
peaceful and inclusive, resilient and cohesive societies,
with the rule of law, solid institutions and policies
oriented towards sustainable development, in line with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals, which contribute to
conflict prevention.
Similarly, we support efforts to strengthen the links
between the Human Rights Council and the Security
Council for early warning and action in situations of
risk of atrocities, thereby avoiding additional painful
cases of inaction or late response to serious crises. At
the same time, we reiterate that collective actions based
on the responsibility to protect must go hand in hand
with reliable and timely information, so that decisions
are accountable, transparent and are guided by a single
objective — the ethical imperative to protect individuals

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

and groups from the four atrocity crimes covered under
the responsibility to protect. We therefore support the
work of the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, and
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, Ms. Karen Smith.
In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that the joint
work of the United Nations and the strengthening
of multilateralism are the most effective tools for
maintaining international order, peace and security.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland associates itself with the statement
delivered this morning by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect (see A/73/PV.93).
Switzerland welcomes the inclusion of this
important debate on the agenda of the seventy-third
session of the General Assembly. As a country that
has made the prevention of atrocity crimes one of its
foreign policy objectives, we commend the SecretaryGeneral for having focused his report (A/73/898) on the
lessons learned in the area of prevention. Switzerland
agrees with the report’s main points and would like to
stress three in particular.
First, we can never emphasize enough how crucial
it is for us to manage diversity constructively. Although
our own system in Switzerland is by no means perfect,
it is precisely the efforts we have made in this area,
especially with regard to our linguistic minorities, that
have enabled us to live in peace for more than 150 years
and to feel that we are all equal citizens. This transcends
our cultural differences, which we consider a source of
richness rather than an obstacle. We are always happy to
share our experiences, be it with regard to federalism,
decentralization or respect for linguistic minorities.
Secondly, for the past 15 years, Switzerland has
been lending support to processes of addressing the
past in various contexts. That experience has shown
us the importance of putting in place guarantees of
non-recurrence in order to break cycles of violence
and establish lasting peace. Those guarantees — a less
well-known and less-analysed pillar of transitional
justice that is sometimes reduced only to security sector
reforms — are precisely what make it possible to best
address and eliminate the root causes of violence. They
also form a natural link between peace and security,
human rights and development.

Thirdly, Switzerland wholeheartedly supports the
approach proposed by the Secretary-General, which
aims to ensure that a more holistic type of prevention
be launched early on. It is for that same reason that
we are committed to Global Action Against Mass
Atrocity Crimes, whose efforts in that regard focus on
the responsibility to protect at the national level and
on learning between countries and communities. We
remain convinced that, when it comes to the prevention
of conflicts and atrocities, we have much to learn from
other prevention systems, such as from public health
systems and from efforts to prevent natural disasters.
In those areas, it has been possible to adopt a more
holistic approach and make advances in genuine early
prevention. The review of Sustainable Development
Goal 16 during the High-level Political Forum next
month will also offer an opportunity to place prevention
at the centre of our debate and action.
The fight against impunity also has an essential
role to play in prevention, in particular through its
deterrent effect. It is important to close all loopholes
and ensure that those responsible for crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes be
brought to justice. National justice systems have the
primary responsibility to prosecute and judge those
crimes. If that is not possible, however, international
criminal justice must play a complementary and critical
role. Switzerland therefore continues to promote and
support international mechanisms to combat impunity,
particularly the International Criminal Court.
Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
thank the Office on Genocide Prevention and the Office
on the Responsibility to Protect and its Special Advisers
for their efforts to keep the prevention of atrocities on
the Organization’s agenda.
Mr. Chang Wook-jin (Republic of Korea): Let
me start by thanking the President for convening
today’s meeting and welcoming the inclusion of the
item “The responsibility to protect and the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity” on the formal agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session.
I would also like to express my delegation’s support
for the crucial work of the Secretary-General as well
as his Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Adama Dieng
and Ms. Karen Smith, respectively. I welcome their
leadership in advancing mass atrocity prevention and

mainstreaming the responsibility to protect (R2P)
within the United Nations system.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (A/73/898) entitled “Responsibility to protect:
lessons learned for prevention”, with its ongoing
focus on prevention, following the reports from the
two previous years (A/71/1016 and A/72/884). As he
highlights in the report, atrocity crimes are preventable
when local, national, regional and international actors
make full use of the diplomatic tools that we have in a
timely and decisive manner. He also points out, however,
that there is a widening gap between the 2005 World
Summit commitment to R2P and the daily experience
of vulnerable populations. We must do more, and we
can do more.
In that context, while aligning myself with the
statement made by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the Group of Friends of R2P (see A/73/PV.93),
I would like to highlight three points with regard to the
prevention of mass atrocity crimes, bearing in mind the
recommendations from the Secretary-General’s report.
First, ensuring accountability and ending impunity
for mass atrocity crimes is one of the most effective
ways to prevent their recurrence. States have the
primary responsibility to hold perpetrators accountable
for crimes committed within their jurisdictions. The
international community must spare no effort in
supporting national accountability efforts through
judicial cooperation and capacity-building assistance.
Furthermore, my delegation reaffirms its support for the
International Criminal Court, which plays a crucial role
in our collective efforts to end impunity for genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Secondly, we must make the most of existing
mechanisms for translating early warning into early
action if we are to succeed in narrowing the gap between
our commitments and the suffering of vulnerable
populations. We are well aware that the Security
Council has sometimes failed to live up to its special
responsibility to respond to atrocity crime risks in a
timely and decisive manner. In that regard, the Republic
of Korea, as a supporter of the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and of the political declaration on the suspension of
veto powers in cases of mass atrocity, is of the view that
the use of the veto should be limited in situations that
require immediate action to respond to mass atrocities.

We also need to make better use of the United
Nations human rights systems and strengthen the links
between the Human Rights Council and the Security
Council. The Universal Periodic Review and special
procedures can help identify possible risks early on
and facilitate action by national Governments and the
international community. Regular Security Council
briefings on mass atrocity situations by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights can help better
incorporate mass atrocity prevention into the Security
Council’s agenda.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen our comprehensive
and coordinated approach to further mainstream R2P
across the entire United Nations system and establish
greater synergy among the Organization’s three pillars.
In that connection, the Republic of Korea welcomes
the efforts of the Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect to
mainstream R2P within the United Nations system,
including through the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes. My delegation also reiterates its
support for the Human Rights Up Front initiative,
which is aimed at bringing the United Nations system
together in a mutually supportive way to strengthen
the Organization’s capacity to prevent serious human
rights violations at an early stage and sound the alarm
before abuses can escalate into mass atrocity crimes. In
addition, we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
recent initiative to launch the United Nations Strategy
and Plan of Action on Hate Speech.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
Republic of Korea’s commitment to the responsibility
to protect. I look forward to working together with
other Member States in our collective effort to protect
vulnerable people from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Like many other delegations,
we welcome the inclusion of today’s debate on the
responsibility to protect (R2P) into the formal agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session.
Poland co-sponsored resolution 63/308, the first standalone General Assembly resolution on R2P in 2009. We
declare our unwavering readiness to support the full
implementation of the concept of the responsibility
to protect.
We also wish to warmly welcome the appointment
of Ms. Karen Smith as the new Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect.

Poland commends efforts undertaken in this crucial
role and supports all actions aimed at mainstreaming
the responsibility to protect within the United Nations
system. We also would like to express our deep
appreciation for the positive role played by the Office
of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide in advancing the responsibility
to protect, under the leadership of Under-SecretaryGeneral Adama Dieng.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/898), entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons
learned for prevention”, reminds us that in 2005 World
Summit outcome document, acknowledged by all
our political leaders, is as valid now as it was then.
Let me reiterate that the responsibility to protect is
not an abstract concept. The responsibility to protect
means nothing less than saving lives on ground. Let
me focus on three issues that we believe are of crucial
importance in the context of today’s discussion, namely,
respect for international law, conflict prevention
and accountability.
First, with regard to international law, we call
on all Member States to uphold their obligations
under international law, including human rights
law, humanitarian law and refugee law. Respect for
international law instruments can be a true preventive
factor with respect to mass atrocities. Poland addressed
this issue last year during our open debate in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8262) with the aim of
promoting respect for basic rules of international law.
Let me reiterate that respect for international law is
not a matter of choice; it is a matter of Member States’
complying with their obligations. Last year, we marked
the seventieth anniversary of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
We urge those Member States that have not yet ratified
the document to do so.
Secondly, with regard to conflict prevention, we
believe it is vital that the Security Council better utilize
its working methods in order to bring potential mass
atrocity situations into the spotlight. Poland organized
an Arria Formula meeting last December on raising the
effectiveness of atrocity crimes prevention. Examples
of tangible actions the Security Council could take
to prevent atrocity crimes were abundant in the
meeting. We welcomed the information that eight out
of 14 United Nations peacekeeping operations include
protection of civilians mandates and the fact that the
Council has directly referenced R2P in a number of

mandates, namely, in connection with the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Mali and South Sudan.
Utilizing the right combination of carefully tailored
measures reduces the need for further ones. Preventive
action should be focused and region- and contextspecific. Measures are most effective when they
are individualized and focus on addressing specific
problems or influencing specific individuals. There is
no one-size-fits-all approach. The early recognition of
warning signs must, however, be followed by concrete
actions to prevent the development of conflict. As such,
national and local ownership are critical, and early
action is successful only if it enjoys the support of its
intended beneficiaries. We support community-level
engagement and see a need to further integrated it into
our actions.
Thirdly, with regard to accountability, we must not
allow those who commit atrocities to go unpunished.
Ensuring accountability for mass atrocity of crimes
is one of the best ways to prevent their recurrence. It
is Member States’ responsibility to investigate and
prosecute crimes committed within their jurisdictions.
In the long term, there is no peace without justice and
without accountability. In that context, let me reaffirm
Poland’s support for the International Criminal Court,
which remains the key institutional instrument in the
battle to end impunity for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
The Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council should consider ways
to better utilize tools at their disposal to strengthen
international accountability for atrocity crimes. Poland,
if elected this year to the Human Rights Council, will
encourage Member States to strengthen the links
between the Human Rights Council and the Security
Council for early action and early warning.
In conclusion, we have to renew the commitment of
our leaders, made in 2005, to helping States build their
capacities to protect their populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, and to assisting those that are under stress
before crises and conflicts arise.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): This debate is
an opportunity for us to reaffirm our support for the
principles of our responsibility to protect (R2P), as
endorsed at the 2005 World Summit. Yet, despite this
historic commitment, it is clear as we look across the

world that we are failing in our responsibility. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees reports that armed conflict and persecution
have led to 70.8 million people being forcibly displaced.
Some States Members of the United Nations not only
fail to protect their people, they willingly harm them.
Our adherence to R2P has therefore never been more
important. We must continue to assert that States should
protect, not harm, their people. We should anticipate
and defuse conflicts before they begin. And, where
atrocities occur, we should investigate and hold those
responsible accountable. Unlike some, we strongly
support the inclusion of this item on the formal agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s reports
and the valuable work being done by Special Adviser
Adama Dieng and, now, Karen Smith.
Let us remind ourselves what our common
undertakings are. Under pillar I, States must uphold
their obligations under international human rights law,
humanitarian law and refugee law. But there are too
many examples of States that fail to do so because they
are either unable, but more often unwilling, to meet
their responsibilities. Some of those States spoke in
the Hall this morning (see A/73/PV.93). Tellingly, they
dispute the concept of the responsibility to protect.
They do so because its existence is a daily repudiation
of their abuses against their own peoples.
In Venezuela, economic devastation, starvation and
malnutrition have resulted in the flight of over 3 million
Venezuelans to neighbouring countries — the largest
migration in Latin American history. In Myanmar, a
culture of military impunity left the civilian Government
unable to prevent the mass exodus of 700,000 Rohingya
refugees who have fled to Bangladesh since 2017,
primarily owing to the actions of the Myanmar military.
There are a further 244,000 internally displaced
persons within Myanmar. The atrocities against the
Rohingya and other ethnic minorities constitute ethnic
cleansing on an industrial scale and may constitute
genocide. And in Syria, whose representative we heard
from at length this morning (see A/73/PV.93), the
horrifying reports of attacks on schools, hospitals and
first responders and the use of barrel bombs in Idlib are
chilling examples of the devastating effects on civilians
when a State not only fails to uphold its responsibility
to protect, but actively breaches its obligations to do
so. Russia and the Al-Assad regime must cease those
attacks against the Syrian people and respect their

obligations under international human rights law. But
we must all — here — redouble our efforts to help those
people whose own Governments have abandoned them
or actively persecute them.
We should also do more, as the Secretary-General’s
reform agenda urges us, to focus on the preventative
capabilities within the responsibility to protect, pillar
II. We know that human rights violations and abuses,
if left unchecked, can be both an indicator of, and a
first step towards, mass atrocities. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s assessment that there needs to be
a more systematic and structured approach across the
United Nations system to information gathering, the
assessment of atrocity risks and collective analysis, so
that Member States can receive early recommendations
for action and prevention. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that there should be greater use of the Human
Rights Council and the Universal Periodic Review
process to highlight human rights violations and abuses
and to help States respond to them. The Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
continues to play an essential role in mainstreaming
R2P within the United Nations and on an international
level. We welcome the appointment of Ms. Karen
Smith as the new R2P Special Adviser and support her
work in partnership with the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide in bringing potential risks of
atrocity crimes to the attention of the Security Council.
Mediation also has a key role. Active preventive
diplomacy and mediation can help prevent atrocities
and reduce tensions and conflict. The United Kingdom
has been a strong supporter of the strengthened United
Nations mediation capacity. The Secretary-General
recently reported that peacebuilding dividends in
respect to Mali, Madagascar, Ethiopia, Eritrea and
South Sudan were all clearly visible from this work.
We encourage States to be alert to the early signs of
conflict, engage with communities and civil society
and make use of the Secretary-General’s good offices
and the Mediation Support Unit.
These peacebuilding processes and efforts to
prevent conflict also need to be inclusive and diverse.
We know that women continue to build peace when
formal processes fail. They lobby for peace processes
to begin when parties refuse to talk, and implement
peace agreements long after international donors have
left. We want to see the United Nations, through support
from the international community, increase the number
of female special envoys nominated by the Secretary-

General, and increase both the number of women
nominated for the Standby Team of Senior Mediation
Advisers and the number of female candidates selected.
Finally, on the third pillar, accountability and
ending impunity are vital for deterring the recurrence of
atrocity crimes. States have the primary responsibility
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdictions. While international courts and
hybrid tribunals can play an important role where
States are genuinely unwilling or unable to do so, the
United Nations should draw on diverse mechanisms
to identify risks and take early action to prevent
countries from falling into greater crisis. We will
continue to shine a light on appalling violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
in situations such as Syria and Myanmar. There should
be no impunity for those who perpetrate such crimes
and atrocities.
There were a handful of suggestions in the Hall this
morning that the responsibility to protect is somehow
discredited. However, those voices are an insignificant
minority when set against the voices of support we have
heard today. But our words of support need to result
in real action. Yesterday, in this Hall, we recommitted
ourselves to the Charter of the United Nations — we the
peoples. But what good is that if we do not recommit
ourselves to the responsibility to protect those peoples?
We call on all Member States to do all in their power
to prevent and end atrocities against the peoples and to
prosecute those responsible for them. We owe this to
those who cannot protect themselves.
Mrs. Puerschel (Germany): Allow me to start
by reiterating Germany’s full commitment to the
responsibility to protect (R2P) and underlining
the importance of including it in the agenda of the
General Assembly.
For us, R2P is in our DNA, and we always carry
it with us — whether it be in the deliberations in the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council or the
Security Council. In fact, Germany ran for a Security
Council seat on a prevention platform to do more for
conflict prevention and, importantly, to do more for
human rights and international accountability for mass
atrocities. We fully believe in “never again”, and are
constantly engaging in efforts to foster a culture of
historical consciousness in Germany itself, an important
part of guaranteeing non-recurrence. Therefore, for us,
it is of the utmost importance that the responsibility

to protect be about preventing and national capacitybuilding. In particular, Germany wants to strengthen
the preventive aspect of the concept and pillar II
through operational work.
I thank the Chef de Cabinet for her statement this
morning (see A/73/PV.93). We hope that the SecretaryGeneral will be able to join us again for this important
debate next year. I also thank Special Adviser Karen
Smith for her first report, especially for its emphasis on
civil society and its mention of civil society as a source
of resilience. Of course, Germany fully supports the
crucial work of the Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect and
works closely together with them.
We align ourselves with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/73/PV.93). I
would like to underline four points specifically.
First, it is important that the Security Council
consider mass atrocity crimes and the responsibility
to protect in its work. During the German-French
presidency of the Council in March and April, we focused
on the implementation of humanitarian law, which is
a crucial element in ensuring that the responsibility
to protect works. For example, our Foreign Minister
presided over a debate on sexual violence in conflict (see
S/PV.8514), which in some cases may amount of crimes
against humanity, war crimes or acts of genocide. In
the same vein, our Minister of Justice led an informal
meeting of the Security Council on the prosecution of
sexual violence in conflict.
Encouraging links between the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council is another example.
We need regular briefings in the Security Council by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. In that regard, we have been impressed
by the input that we have received on Haiti and on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
We will also be launching a humanitarian call for
action, together with France, during the high-level
week in September. We call for the continuation of this
practice. Germany will certainly continue to play its
part in mainstreaming human rights into all United
Nations bodies.
Secondly, Germany is dedicated to strengthening
a rules-based international order, which is effective

only if there is accountability. We therefore strongly
support the international criminal justice system, and
in particular the International Criminal Court, as a
means of providing accountability for perpetrators, but
also as a powerful means of deterrence. That is why
Germany is also supportive of the ongoing deliberations
of the International Law Commission on articles on
crimes against humanity with a view to promulgating a
draft convention.
We also back other accountability bodies, such as the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 and the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar that
was just established. We all for the latter to become
operational as soon as possible.
Myanmar brings me to my third point — the role of
the United Nations system in preventing mass atrocities.
We welcome the release of the Rosenthal report, and
call on the Secretary-General to take its conclusions
too heart. At the same time, we are encouraged that the
United Nations conducted a transparent review of its
actions. While the Secretariat needs to rightly look to
its intergovernmental bodies to guide it in its actions,
the United Nations also needs to be fit for purpose
when it comes to mass atrocity prevention. We hope
that reform of the Resident Coordinator system will
be fruitful in that regard. We would be interested to
hear in the near future how Resident Coordinators are
prioritizing human rights and mass atrocity prevention
in their work. And, of course, the Secretary-General can
always bring situations of concern of the Secretariat to
the attention of the Security Council under Article 99
of the Charter.
Finally, and as a fourth point, Germany strengthens
pillar II of R2P internally as well as in its foreign
policy. For example, the Foreign Office is including
crisis prevention as a concrete aim that needs to be
reached in its general instructions to the heads of our
own missions abroad. Furthermore, within the German
so-called early warning-early action process, we are
developing technological capabilities to monitor crisis
and atrocity risk factors in specific countries. Lastly,
we also provide funding to civil society organizations
to increase local capacities in mass atrocity prevention.
For example, just this month we issued funding to the

Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation to
work on capacity-building in Latin America.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
responsibility to protect with a special focus on
lessons learned for prevention (A/73/898). The report
identifies the principal areas where timely action and
constructive engagement can facilitate the prevention
of atrocity crimes. Addressing the underlying sources
of past atrocity crimes and focusing on truth, justice
and reparations is paramount in that regard.
Armenia remains strongly committed to advancing
the prevention of mass atrocities and the crime of
genocide, as well as identity-based discrimination
against all groups and peoples. Countering hate speech
as one of the early warning signs, which may lead to
the incitement to violence, should be an integral part
of the prevention mechanisms. We need to join efforts
to develop a workable set of actions with the human
rights-based approach in mind to promote tolerance as
an essential step on the way to more inclusive societies.
In that regard, we welcome the recent initiative of
the Secretary-General to launch the United Nations
Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech, which was
elaborated by the Special Adviser for the Prevention
of Genocide.
Nowadays, we continue to witness the spreading of
hate speech, racial and ethnic profiling, the glorification
of hate crimes, and the denial and justification of
past atrocities, including the crime of genocide. It is
especially deplorable when odious policies of denialism,
which are an offence to the dignity and memory of the
victims of genocide, are led and encouraged by public
figures and high State officials. Such denials and
justification manifest a flagrant subversion of the fight
against impunity for atrocity crimes. They undermine
the important efforts of the international community to
prevent situations in which the crime of genocide could
be committed.
We believe that educational and cultural
institutions, together with civil society and faithbased organizations, have a greater role to play in
enhancing understanding and informing perceptions
and ideas around prevention as a concept. Since 2015,
Armenia has hosted the Global Forum Against the
Crime of Genocide. The third Global Forum, which
took place in December 2018, was organized with the
support of the Office on Genocide Prevention and the

Responsibility to Protect and in cooperation with the
International Association of Genocide Scholars and
was dedicated to prevention through education, culture
and memorialization.

upon. The need for open conversation on most serious
violations of human rights that can lead to genocide,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity is still
very pertinent.

Prevention is not and has never been a simple
process, as very often neither societies nor international
institutions are fully prepared to thoroughly identify
early warning signs and assess risks. Armenia attaches
great importance to the universal ratification and
comprehensive observance of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
And we view education as a tool for contributing to
awareness-raising of past genocides and promoting the
right to truth.

Mr. Flynn (Ireland): We welcome the convening
of today’s debate. The inclusion of the responsibility to
protect on the formal agenda of the General Assembly
is indicative of the widespread support for this concept
and its continuing importance to our work. The debate
today is particularly timely, as we mark the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1265 (1999), on
the protection of civilians.

We have been at the forefront of international
efforts to prevent and counter identity-based hate
crimes, including the crime of genocide. Armenia
has traditionally sponsored resolutions related to this
issue, having introduced the first resolution on this
subject at the Commission on Human Rights in 1998.
Subsequently, the scope and substance of the resolutions
introduced at the Human Rights Council on the subject
have been fundamentally enriched.

Ireland has long been a strong supporter of
international human rights bodies and monitoring
mechanisms. They form an integral part of the
existing early-warning system for potential threats
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Along with the International
Criminal Court, which has a crucial role to play in
ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes,
those monitoring mechanisms are an important tool
for prevention.

The adoption, in 2015, of resolution 69/323, which
designated 9 December as the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the
Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of This
Crime, was a landmark achievement in that regard.
The most recent Human Rights Council resolution on
this subject, entitled “Prevention of genocide”, which
was initiated by Armenia and unanimously adopted by
the Human Rights Council in March 2018, draws the
attention of the international community to the issue
of early warning in situations that can lead to genocide
and highlights the importance of education and regional
and subregional cooperation for prevention and holding
perpetrators accountable. Our priorities in the Human
Rights Council include fostering cooperation for the
prevention of genocide and mass atrocities and the
further development of national and international earlywarning mechanisms.
We also acknowledge certain differences of opinion
when it comes to the definition and interpretation of
the concept of the responsibility to protect, especially
given its multidimensional nature. At the same time,
that divergence in approaches should not hinder the
responsibility and commitment towards the core values,
norms and principles that the United Nations is built

As we know, 8 of the 14 current United Nations
peacekeeping missions, accounting for approximately
95 per cent of all peacekeepers, operate with a protection
of civilians mandate. However, we need to ensure that
we provide missions with the appropriate capabilities to
fulfil those mandates. Just as important are the skills of
our peacekeepers. Ireland is active in helping to build
that capacity. For example, in the past six months, we
provided two sessions of training in the protection of
civilians to fellow troop contributors.
In addition, Ireland’s new development assistance
policy has a particular focus on conflict-affected and
fragile States in recognition of the links between
crisis and conflict. We are working, for example, with
the Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation
to develop a universal training tool that can be used
to build the capacity of security sectors to prevent
conflict-related atrocity crimes.
We know that the impact of conflict on women
and girls is multifaceted and far-reaching. Ireland is a
strong supporter of the women and peace and security
agenda, which we see as an integral, indeed essential,
part of the conflict-prevention framework. Ireland has
just launched its third national action plan on women

and peace and security, within which women’s right to
equal participation and their important role as leaders
and decision-makers in all peacebuilding processes is a
particular priority.
Ireland wishes to emphasize the role that regional
organizations can play in the prevention of atrocity
crimes. The European Union is itself a manifestation
of conflict prevention through social, economic and
political cooperation. We see the value of national focal
points at the national and regional levels and support
the appointment by more regional organizations of
their own R2P focal points. This year Ireland was
also pleased to co-host with the Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect the annual lecture on R2P,
which was delivered by former Irish Deputy Prime
Minister Eamon Gilmore, who is now the European
Union’s Special Representative for Human Rights.
We recognize and value the work that Ms. Karen
Smith, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, has already been undertaking
in her short time in that vital role and pledge Ireland’s
full support in facilitating that work. Similarly, we
were pleased to support the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group’s code of conduct, which to
date has been endorsed by some 119 countries, as well
as the French and Mexican declaration on voluntary
restraint in the use of the veto by permanent members
of the Security Council. Those initiatives help to
reinforce the collective responsibility to prevent mass
atrocity crimes.
The proliferation of arms increases the likelihood
of atrocity crimes. Ireland has championed action on
explosive weapons in populated areas, and we will
advance that work at every opportunity.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my thanks to
the President for providing this opportunity to
reaffirm our shared commitment to the protection of
vulnerable populations.
Ms. Khyne (Myanmar): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
2019 report, entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons
learned for prevention” (A/73/898).
Myanmar shares with many delegations the concern
over the lack of progress and consensus on the concept
of the responsibility to protect (R2P) while recognizing
the importance of the prevention of atrocity crimes.
Although we have been engaged in intensive debates

on the concept for more than a decade, we have yet to
agree on how to translate it into practice. There remains
a serious divergence among Member States even on
the interpretation of the principle of the responsibility
to protect.
The Secretary-General’s report for this year
emphasizes the importance of prevention. My
delegation could not agree more. Preventive measures
can be in many forms. Any potential cause of possible
atrocity crimes should be prevented.
In that regard, I would like to underline the primary
responsibility of the State in taking the necessary
measures to prevent imminent threats of atrocities.
Such measures include, but are not limited to, the
peaceful resolution of conflict, strengthening the
rule of law, the promotion of human rights, building
peace and harmony among citizens and socioeconomic
development. Regional organizations and the
international community should render assistance or
expertise to countries that need to strengthen their
domestic capacity in order to fulfil their responsibility.
In that respect, countries should develop the
policies and mechanisms best suited to their own
situations in order to prevent conflict and ensure the
peaceful settlement of disputes. National ownership
must be ensured in preventing atrocity crimes.
In applying the concept of R2P, the universally
accepted principles of respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States,
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
must be upheld. We must not allow the principle of R2P
to be abused or hijacked by any particular country or
group of countries for their political purposes.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome document
clearly states that the application of the responsibility to
protect is strictly limited to genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. It is crucial that
judging or categorizing a situation as a specific atrocity
crime or deciding to invoke R2P must be done based
on well-founded, unbiased and factual information and
with impartiality, accuracy and objectivity.
Moreover, overemphasizing the role of international
legal institutions undermines the role of national
institutions. The role of international institutions
should complement rather than compete with the duty
of the Government and the interests of the people of
that particular nation.

Addressing hate speech is an essential measure
for preventing tension and conflicts. My delegation
therefore welcomes the launching of the United
Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech.
The international community and the global network of
mainstream and social media should also act responsibly
in not promoting hatred and conflict.
The individual State has the primary responsibility
to protect and to prevent atrocity crimes. The
international community can also assist States in a
constructive and positive manner in shouldering their
responsibility in good faith. Invoking the concept of R2P
for political purposes with ill intent will undermine the
core value and purpose of the responsibility to protect.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein welcomes
the third formal debate of the General Assembly on the
responsibility to protect (R2P) and aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect (see A/73/PV.93). The agreement on the
responsibility to protect is one of the most important
achievements of the 2005 World Summit. Liechtenstein
continues to be fully committed to the R2P norm and
consistently supports measures to further improve
its operationalization.
The concept of R2P enjoys broad political
support but much remains to be done in practice. The
responsibility of each State to protect its population
from mass atrocities is uncontested. However, in
committing to the R2P norm, we have also collectively
agreed on a joint obligation when the authorities are
unable or unwilling to live up to that responsibility. R2P
can be implemented through a wide range of measures,
from diplomatic engagement to more vigorous action,
including that taken by the Security Council. As the
situations in Myanmar, Syria and Yemen prove, all too
often the responsibility to protect continues to be elusive
in practice. We have been observing the inability of the
Council to do its work with increasing frustration.
In an important commitment to improving the
performance of the Security Council, 119 States
have signed up to the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct on mass atrocities.
They thereby commit to taking measures to end or
prevent atrocity crimes when serving on the Council
and not to vote against credible draft resolutions
put forward to that effect. The code of conduct is an
essential political commitment that can change the

political culture in the Council when faced with the
risk or occurrence of atrocity crimes. Despite the
strong support for the code of conduct, the use of the
veto has significantly increased in recent years, in most
cases preventing Security Council action in response to
mass atrocities.
Liechtenstein supports the strong and active role
of the General Assembly, in particular where the
Security Council fails to address atrocity crimes in
accordance with its mandate pursuant to the Charter
of the United Nations. The International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 is a
positive example of the General Assembly’s potential
in that regard. Liechtenstein is also of the principled
view that any veto cast in the Security Council should
automatically be discussed in the General Assembly,
independent of the subject matter and without prejudice
to the outcome of such a discussion. We are pleased to
see that such an approach has met with interest among
the membership.
Liechtenstein agrees with the Secretary-General
that a stronger focus on prevention is necessary. We very
much welcome his new strategy against hate speech,
which can trigger and sustain a spiral of escalation
and violence that may result in atrocity crimes. Under
pillar I of the responsibility to protect, States have a
clear responsibility to act preventively against such
developments. A vocal stance against hate speech by
political leaders can send a strong message to that end.
In addition, States must promote and make full
use of the rule of law when mass atrocity crimes are
committed. Criminal accountability for mass atrocities
is of paramount importance in order to break recurring
cycles of violence and deter the commission of future
crimes. The International Criminal Court can play
a direct role in having an impact with respect to
preventing mass atrocity crimes from occurring. We
will continue to support the Court and its important
work, including by promoting the universality of the
Rome Statute.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect (see A/73/PV.93).

Uruguay is pleased to be part of the group of
countries that requested the inclusion of this item on the
agenda of the General Assembly at its current session
and advocates that it be incorporated as a permanent
item on this organ’s programme of work. In the current
international context, there is the threat of the most
serious crimes against millions of innocent victims.
As the main deliberative organ of the Organization,
the General Assembly has the inescapable obligation to
actively and transparently debate possible alternatives
and mechanisms, such as the responsibility to protect,
in order to prevent such crimes, which assail our
collective conscience.
Uruguay supports pillars I and II on prevention
as the most effective way to address the responsibility
to protect in the understanding that that is the central
axis of this principle. States are primarily responsible
for protecting their populations. History shows that
no region of the world is immune to the threat of
atrocity crimes. Those crimes find fertile ground
in environments where inequality and intolerance
prevail. All countries must therefore constantly work
to strengthen their respective societies by promoting
development and human rights. In addition, we must
make greater efforts to promote the participation of
women as agents of prevention of atrocity crimes.
Uruguay has continued to make progress in
promoting equality and eradicating discrimination.
Recent examples are the adoption of the new
comprehensive law on transgender persons, which
provides continuity to and broadens the provisions of
Law No. 17,676, which criminalizes acts of hatred,
contempt or violence against individuals due to the
colour of their skin, their race, religion, national or
ethnic origin or sexual orientation or identity.

But, apart from States, the United Nations has a
fundamental role to play. The Security Council, on which
the Charter of the United Nations confers the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, must adopt effective measures, including
referring cases to the International Criminal Court.
Unfortunately, the Council is often paralysed by the
threat of use or use of the veto. My country reaffirms its
support for the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group and for the
initiative of France and Mexico on voluntary abstention
from the use of the veto by the permanent members of
the Security Council.
I would like to emphasize the importance of
peacekeeping operations as one of the main tools for
prevention and early warning. In order to implement
such missions, it is essential to have properly trained
personnel deployed on the ground. Uruguay’s National
Peace Operations Training Institute offers courses on
human rights and the protection of civilians. In that
way, our troops and those of other troop-contributing
countries are trained, including in the area of early
warning. However, it should be noted that, in order for
peace operations to be able to carry out such tasks, it
is also necessary to provide them with the necessary
financial resources.
The Human Rights Council is another key body
that the Organization has in order to prevent and
respond to mass atrocities. The Universal Periodic
Review, in particular, is a very important mechanism
for prevention. Uruguay believes that better use should
be made of the human rights system and greater
cooperation should be encouraged with other United
Nations bodies.

States must also ensure that perpetrators of atrocity
crimes are investigated and prosecuted. In addition to
being an act of justice, accountability is effective in
preventing such crimes.

My country also supports the essential role of the
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility
to Protect and its Special Advisers in the prevention
efforts of the United Nations.

States also have at their disposal mechanisms such
as regional and global networks specialized in the
responsibility to protect and in the prevention of mass
atrocity crimes — effective initiatives to provide and
strengthen the preventive capacities of States. Uruguay
is part of the Global Network of the Responsibility to
Protect Focal Points, as well as the Latin American
Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention.

In conclusion, Uruguay particularly appreciates
the role played by another actor that we consider
essential: civil society. I would like to take this
opportunity to express my country’s gratitude to the
Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect and
the other non-governmental organizations for their
commendable and dedicated work in defence of life and
human dignity.

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China listened carefully to Ms. Viotti’s statement
(see A/73/PV.93) and took note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the issue of the responsibility
to protect (A/73/898). We would like to make the
following observations.
Pursuant to international law, Governments have
the primary responsibility to protect their citizens,
which is a role that is irreplaceable. The international
community should abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, fully respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned and uphold the fundamental principles that
govern international relations, such as non-interference
in internal affairs, non-aggression and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The will and leadership of the
countries concerned should be fully respected and
constructive assistance should be provided to them. All
parties should strive to resolve their differences through
dialogue, consultation and political negotiation and
should prevent conflicts, resolve disputes peacefully,
reduce armed conflicts, foster the concept of a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security and build a community for the shared future
of humankind.
Prevention is the key to implementing the
responsibility to protect (R2P). We should step up our
efforts to focus more on prevention and vigorously
address both the symptoms and the root causes of
conflict. As stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we should take preventive measures in various
fields, including the eradication of extreme poverty
and uneven development. We should build inclusive
societies, strengthen national capacity-building,
resolve problems by political means and fully leverage
the role of United Nations agencies and regional and
subregional organizations.
Development is a fundamental priority. All countries
should prioritize development and work together to
promote the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, enhance the capacity of
developing countries to achieve their own development
and reduce and eradicate poverty at a global level so
as to build a foundation for conflict prevention. At the
same time, the international community should strive
to build a vision of civilization that promotes mutual
respect and equality. We should support equality and
respect, abandon arrogance and prejudice and promote

openness, tolerance and mutual learning in building an
inclusive social culture.
According to the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document, the responsibility to protect is strictly
limited to four kinds of crimes: genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. That
formulation is a balanced compromise negotiated
by all countries and a hard-won consensus, which
should not be subject to wilful expansion, much less
misinterpretation or abuse. Member States have not
yet agreed on the definition of and criteria for R2P.
Informal discussions, led by Member States, should
therefore continue. Consensus should be gradually
forged in order to avoid forcing issues onto the agenda
of the General Assembly. The persistent promotion and
imposition of controversial issues will only harm the
common interest of Member States.
China would like to underline once again that the use
of force in enforcement measures and the authorization
to use force should be considered only when all peaceful
measures have been exhausted. It should also be in
line with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. Military action taken by the international
community to protect civilians must be authorized by
the Security Council with strict conditions attached and
explicit methods of implementation, which should be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
thanks the President of the General Assembly and the
Chef de Cabinet to the Secretary-General for their
statements (see A/73/PV.93), as well as Denmark and
Qatar for their leadership of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect.
The responsibility to protect (R2P) is a disarmingly
simple idea. It advocates that sovereign States have a
responsibility to protect their own populations from
four crimes that shock the conscience of humankind:
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing. R2P draws a red line when it comes to
atrocity crimes. Today R2P is about prevention. To that
end, Canada would like to see the Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect formally
mandated to submit an annual report on R2P.
The report of the independent international factfinding mission on Myanmar highlights the existence
of serious human rights violations, including gang rape
and sexual slavery. We have repeatedly called for an
immediate end to violence and persecution in Myanmar

and for those responsible to be held accountable. The
prevention of future atrocity crimes can be meaningful
only if the ongoing mass atrocity crimes are addressed
first. Accountability is an important tool to that end.
That is why Canada’s foreign policy priorities include
revitalizing the rules-based international order and
reaffirming its support for international institutions,
such as the International Criminal Court (ICC). We
continue to advocate for a Security Council referral of
Myanmar to the ICC.
(spoke in English)
Canada welcomes the recent appointment of a
new Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
Ms. Karen Smith of South Africa. The work of the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect to mainstream R2P within
the United Nations system is fundamental in order to
prevent mass atrocity crimes.
That is why Canada calls for enhancing risk
analysis and early-warning mechanisms that include
a strong gender lens, but also regular briefings to the
Security Council by the United Nations Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide, the United Nations
Special Adviser on R2P and the High Commissioner
for Human Rights.
Canada further encourages Security Council
members to better utilize the Council’s working
methods to bring potential mass atrocity situations
for consideration as early as possible. Situational
awareness briefings and the Arria Formula mechanism
must be further used to better incorporate mass atrocity
prevention into the Security Council agenda.
We know that women and girls are targeted and
experience violence differently from men and boys.
They often bear the brunt of the economic and social
consequences of atrocities. Discrimination against
women and girls and other human rights violations
are meaningful indicators of the potential for atrocity
crimes. Sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
settings can be a constituent element of an act of
genocide, a war crime, a crime against humanity or
ethnic cleansing. As such, the protection of those
at risk of sexual and gender-based violence is also a
fundamental responsibility for all States as part of their
commitment to R2P.
Going forward, R2P advocates need to embrace the
struggle against gender discrimination and inequality

on its own terms. Together, we should recognize the
multiple roles of women and girls in the context of
genocide and mass atrocities as victims, bystanders,
perpetrators, protectors and peacemakers. R2P can
achieve its objectives only when the United Nations
goals in advancing women and peace and security,
and in ending gender discrimination more broadly,
are achieved.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): The Philippines
supported the inclusion of an agenda item on the
responsibility to protect (R2P) because we believe in
the need for a formal and continuing discussion by the
General Assembly of the still evolving concept of the
operationalization of R2P.
R2P affirms a State’s responsibility to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity perpetrated by State or
non-State actors or by its own security forces, not just
the latter. The first duty of States is the protection
of their populations from actual harm and threats to
their safety and well-being; that is the basis of State
legitimacy. But a State fails in its responsibility to
protect as much by failing to use every effective means
to protect its population from harm as by abusing it
itself. That happens when States give way to terrorism
and organized crime instead of combating them.
The Philippine Constitution values the dignity of
every person and protects the most vulnerable — women,
children and the poor, who are the easiest and most
frequent victims of mass atrocity crimes that they
cannot flee. And if they can, it is only to be turned
away at the borders of places of greater safety across the
sea. The Constitution protects the law-abiding who are
victims of the lawless, whom it is not the responsibility
of States to protect other than according them the most
basic rights of the accused after they have submitted
to the authority of the State. We must ensure that, in
identifying vulnerable populations, making a criminal
career choice does not set one apart as vulnerable to
anything but inexorable law enforcement.
Prevention is at the core of R2P. There is therefore
a need to strengthen national institutions for good
governance, especially in fighting organized crime
and terrorism, and the imperative of a strong national
defence against genocide-prone foreign State and
non-State actors. There is also a need to reform
democracy to prevent the capture of government by

violent groups such as intolerant mass movements and
forms of organized crime such as the drug trade.
We support the Secretary-General in putting
prevention at the centre of the United Nations peace
and security reform agenda. But part of prevention
is discouraging the misuse of the concept of R2P for
political purposes to justify foreign intervention in
domestic law enforcement. That discredits it and invites
the view that it is objective collusion with the evil that
the State seeks to stamp out.
The road to hell resounds with the footfalls of
the sanctimonious. Hence any application of the
R2P principle must be in strict accordance with the
parameters of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document. Any unreasonable expansion of the concept
would only undermine it and dent its credibility.
We agree with the need to strengthen early-warning
mechanisms to ensure that they lead to early action.
But early warning does not include holding back the
basic State function of stopping crime. The challenge
for R2P is to balance consistency and predictability in
the rule of law, with an appreciation of the uniqueness
of each case.
But in every case, we must acknowledge the
universality of the norms of right and wrong. These
remain opposites. While one might disagree about
what is right, let alone perfect, in all circumstances and
practical in some, there can be no doubt about what is
wrong and the necessity to fight it in every case. We
cannot accept moral relativism. We cannot accept that
there is no such thing as good and evil, but — like beauty
and ugliness being in the mind of the beholder — the
dichotomy is resolved by what is convenient for the
actor. Moral relativism is the greatest evil.
Our assessment of each possible case of failure
of the responsibility to protect must be impartial
and evidence-based, free from politics and double
standards. It excludes the selective use of the veto by
the Security Council permanent five in possible R2P
situations, in tragic revivals of colonial influence.
We also support the Secretary-General’s call
to strengthen the role of women in atrocity crimes
prevention. Women are at the forefront of our peace
processes; they are the easiest targets and victims of
conflict and the first to recognize that conflicts are
futile and an excuse for savagery.

States are encouraged to sign, ratify and implement
basic instruments of international law on this subject,
including the Rome Statute. But the commitment to
protect and advance human rights, including the right
to be safe equally from criminality and abusive State
authority, survives and far exceeds the obligation
to remain in agencies that were designed for their
enforcement but that have compromised themselves in
that task. Bonds are sacred, but institutions are merely
the people who occupy them.
By 2009, the Philippines had already enacted into
law Republic Act 9851, also known as the Philippine
Act on Crimes against International Humanitarian
Law, Genocide and Other Crimes against Humanity.
It proceeds on the principle that the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a
whole must not go unpunished and that their effective
prosecution must be ensured by taking measures at the
national level.
The Secretary-General’s report (A/73/898) states
that today’s crises require strengthened international
cooperation and multilateral institutions. It is our view
that today’s crises equally require trust and respect for
sovereignty, not the assertion of the multilateral over
sovereign States. Now that the United Nations is under
siege from rising protectionist sentiment and hostility
to multilateralism, it becomes even more imperative to
respect the sovereign principle; one can work with it or
even around it, but never against it. That undermines
the international order, as we have seen when States are
made to fail by multilateral action.
R2P is not a licence to intervene in domestic
internal affairs. Therefore, the focus of this annual
debate should be on coming up with a shared, common
understanding of the operationalization of R2P and not
jumping off from the misguided assumption that we
already have that shared, common understanding.
Mr. Komárek (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and the Group of Friends
on the Responsibility to Protect.
As we already heard today, the responsibility
to protect is based on three mutually supporting and
non-sequential pillars: the responsibility of States
to protect their citizens, the shared responsibility of
the international community to provide States with
assistance in implementing that responsibility, and even
the taking of decisive action where all other efforts fail.

While a large part of our discussions is focused on the
third pillar, the essence of our efforts, as suggested by
the Secretary-General in his recent report (A/73/898),
should be focused on the first two pillars, which are
based on prevention and international cooperation. We
are convinced that the work starts at the national level
with ensuring the full and equal participation of all.
Whenever people are left voiceless, whenever
their voices are ignored or twisted, discontent and
grievances grow. That is why the Czech Republic, as
a member of the Human Rights Council, is a driving
force behind the resolution on equal participation in
political and public affairs. Furthermore, in his report,
the Secretary-General rightly stresses the need to
include women in early-warning as well as preventive
measures. In this context, a thorough implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda becomes
a matter of urgency.
The Human Rights Council is a body with a
particularly strong potential for effective early action
and an early-warning function. While the Universal
Periodic Review and treaty bodies play a crucial part
in assessing national risks and resilience, the special
procedures mandate-holders play an irreplaceable
role in early warning and the prevention of mass
atrocities. The Czech Republic supports the efforts to
strengthen the preventive role of the Council and its
efficiency, which we believe will further elevate its role
and credibility.
Last year marked the seventieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide. We would like to urge all States
that have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention
to do so. In the Czech Republic, we reflected the
Convention in our legislation, which actually provides
an even stronger level of protection from genocide by
also listing among the protected groups “class, or other
similar groups of people”.
We can all agree that impunity for the crime of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
encourages their reoccurrence. It is States that have
the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
crimes within their jurisdiction, and such national efforts
should be encouraged and assisted by all other Member
States. At the international level, the International
Criminal Court remains the most important institution
in the battle to end impunity for genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The Czech Republic

continues to support the International Criminal Court
and other international criminal tribunals in their work
and their role as a deterrent of atrocity crimes.
Finally, we would like to use this opportunity to
welcome the inclusion of the responsibility to protect
in the formal agenda of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly and to voice our hope that during the
next session of General Assembly, the responsibility
to protect will finally receive the status of a standing
item on the agenda of the General Assembly, a status it
rightly deserves.
Mr. Raum (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): My
delegation aligns itself with the statements made by the
observer of the European Union and by the representative
of Denmark on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect (see A/73/PV.93). We support
the French-Mexican initiative on the use of the veto and
have signed on to the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct.
Luxembourg welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/73/898) and commends the work done by the
Offices of Under-Secretary-General Adama Dieng and
of the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
Their work in the areas of analysis and early warning
is essential and should be supported both within the
United Nations and on the ground.
My country’s commitment to the operationalization
of the norm of the responsibility to protect (R2P) began
with the adoption of the World Summit Outcome
document and is reflected in our unreserved support
for R2P in the various formal and informal multilateral
forums, including, most importantly, in the General
Assembly and during open debates of the Security
Council. We welcome the standing inclusion of the item
on the Assembly’s agenda and urge the adoption of a
resolution affirming the universal commitment to the
vital norm of the responsibility of all States to protect
their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Given the importance that my country and all
members of the Assembly attach to the Universal
Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council, we also
advocate for the integration of a prevention approach to
atrocity crimes in the context of the Review.
The role of special procedure mandate-holders is
particularly dear to us. Along with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,

special-procedures independent experts provide highquality information to the Human Rights Council and
often sound the alarm on criminal atrocity situations. We
encourage the Security Council to hold regular briefings
by the High Commissioner and by representatives
of commissions of inquiry or fact-finding missions
mandated by the Human Rights Council.
Our informal commitments include the activities of
our national focal point in the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points, with the support of the Global Centre for
the Responsibility to Protect, whose commitment and
resolve we commend. In that context, we encourage
all countries to designate a staff member in their
Administration as a focal point. Luxembourg also
participates in the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect in New York and in Geneva.
Atrocity crimes perpetrated in today’s conflicts are
avoidable, and it is the responsibility of Member States
to prevent them, including through decisive action
against hate speech. If States are not able to fulfil this
responsibility, it is their duty to request assistance
under the second pillar of the norm of R2P. Only as
a last resort should the third pillar of the norm come
into play and the international community intervene.
Recent history has taught us that the rhetoric we have
heard against the third pillar of R2P chiefly protects
authoritarian regimes that are prepared to carry out
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Moreover, it has been established that impunity
encourages recurrence. Here my delegation wishes to
reiterate its unconditional support for the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the independent international fact-finding
mission on Myanmar.
Fourteen years after the 2005 World Summit and
with 10 years to go on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, Luxembourg reiterates its resolute
commitment to the responsibility to protect and to a
multilateral effective system with the United Nations at
its heart, with the goal of safeguarding human dignity
and an international order that is based on the rule
of law.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the President of
the General Assembly on the convening of this meeting

and the outstanding leadership of our work. Allow
me also to congratulate Secretary-General António
Guterres on the high quality of his enlightening report
on the responsibility to protect (A/73/898). I wish to
reiterate my delegation’s readiness to contribute to the
success of this meeting.
Côte d’Ivoire aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Denmark on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect (see
A/73/PV.93).
The holding of this meeting on the responsibility
to protect (R2P) proves once again the United Nations
commitment to ensuring that our peoples will live in a
good world, a world of peace and serenity. Unfortunately,
we cannot but note that the responsibility to protect,
which became a norm of public international law
through its adoption in 2005 during the World Summit
by the States Members of the United Nations, has been
unable to put an end to war crimes and crimes against
humanity or to ease the many hotbeds of tension
throughout our planet.
The threat of armed clashes, genocide and ethnic
cleansing, often met with complete indifference
by the international community, are the daily lot
characterizing many of the issues inscribed on the
agenda of the United Nations. We must therefore use
this meeting as a call to action to avert tragedies such as
those that have been seen in certain parts of the world.
Indeed, recent history has taught us, unfortunately, that
on many occasions States have not been able to protect
their populations or have been passive witnesses to, or
even active actors in, grave and unacceptable violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
Following the Summit in 2005, the General
Assembly unanimously adopted in 2009 resolution
63/308, entitled “The responsibility to protect”, with the
goal of effectively fighting such tragedies. Nevertheless,
we cannot but note that the implementation of the R2P
concept has given rise to divergent views in the United
Nations owing to the differences that could emerge
between this idea and the principle of non-interference
into the domestic affairs of States. Such differences
require us to continue our discussions so as to arrive at
a specific definition of the precise criteria for impartial
and objective decision-making mechanisms, so that we
can avoid all speculation in case of resort to this concept.
We must stress that the sovereignty of States entails
respect for their international commitments, including

respect for and the safeguarding of international
human rights law, and its corollary, the responsibility
to protect civilians.
By becoming a member of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect in 2012, Côte d’Ivoire
reaffirmed its commitment to respect for this principle
and reiterated its willingness to support all actions
aimed at its implementation through good-offices
missions and peacekeeping operations.
I wish also to recall that during the crisis in Côte
d’Ivoire, the Security Council, through resolution 1975
(2011) of 30 March 2011, because of the atrocities
committed, ordered, inter alia, a military intervention
to protect civilians and property. Given our difficult
past, my delegation is of the view that prevention is an
essential means of averting the commission of the worst
kind of atrocities that have been seen in our world.
In that respect, the international community should
be proactive and prioritize the fight against hate speech
and the illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons.
The United Nations must therefore rely more on
early-warning mechanisms and ramp up cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations and civil
society. Cooperation with such organizations will make
it possible to identify and address their needs in terms
of leaders’ capacity-building and financial support, so
as to make them more operational on the ground.
In West Africa, the Economic Community of
West African States has a number of mechanisms
for conflict prevention and the protection of peoples,
in particular, the early-warning mechanism of the
Mediation and Security Council, the Office of the
Special Representative and the Council of the Wise, as
well as the special mediators. Nevertheless, it must be
acknowledged that the existence of these mechanisms,
despite the fact that they are vital, has not always been
able to prevent conflicts, with tragic consequences.
The resort to force is the final alternative for achieving
peace and saving lives when the State that has the
primary responsibility to protect is not able to do so.
I wish to note that today the trend is to shrink the
budget of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which, needless to say, remain a vital tool for the
United Nations and whose operationalization has
allowed the international community to implement
the responsibility to protect and save many lives. Let
us keep in mind the fact that beyond the budgetary

constraints facing the United Nations, no sacrifice is
too great to preserve humankind from mass atrocities.
Ms. Cerrato (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to express my country’s satisfaction
at the holding, once again, of a formal debate on
the responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity — a unique opportunity for the States
Members of the United Nations to promote dialogue on
actions to implement the responsibility to protect, in
line with the 2005 World Summit outcome document.
My country welcomes the report of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres entitled “Responsibility to
protect: lessons learned for prevention” (A/73/898). It
reflects the need to identify lessons learned and positive
examples of prevention in order to make progress in the
implementation of its strategy on the responsibility to
protect, which rests on its three pillars.
Honduras believes that it is necessary to strengthen
international cooperation in order to respond to the
great challenges currently facing developing countries,
giving priority to respect for international human
rights, international humanitarian law and the rights of
refugees and migrants. Similarly, the responsibility to
protect must go hand in hand with efforts to achieve
genuine sustainable peace, which is intended to
contribute to the strengthening of international peace
and security by ensuring the full participation of women
and young people in all spheres of society, particularly
in prevention and peacebuilding.
For my country, the responsibility to protect is a
priority and, although much remains to be done, in
recent years joint actions have been carried out by the
public sector, including the National Congress, the
Ministries of Human Rights, Security and Defence,
academia and civil society. The State of Honduras
has made significant progress in this area, with the
adoption in 2017 of a new criminal code that, pursuant
to approved norms, defines the penalties for the
crimes of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, and establishes in detail the type of penalty
applicable to each of these types of crimes against the
international community.
I would also like to stress that Honduras is a member
of and an active participant in the Latin American
Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention, an
initiative focused on the development of public policies
at the regional level in the area of human rights and

the fight against discrimination, with a special focus
on the prevention of atrocities. My country has also
incorporated the issue of genocide and the prevention
of mass atrocities into the training curriculum for
public servants and members of the armed forces of
Honduras. In addition, we have published educational
material focused on the prevention of discrimination.
Furthermore, the public servants of the Ministry of
Human Rights and other governmental institutions
have benefited from training in the subject by the
Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, for
which we are grateful.
In conclusion, my country is committed to the
Rome Statute and — together with the relevant
bodies at the national, regional and international
levels — to continuing to make progress in the system
for the prevention of these atrocity crimes and the
responsibility to protect the population of Honduras.
Mr. Mike (Hungary): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for convening this formal debate. It
is my honour to speak on behalf of Hungary. While we
align ourselves with the statements delivered on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
(R2P) and the European Union (see A/73/PV.93), I wish
to make a few observations in my national capacity.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s latest report
(A/73/898) and the inclusion of R2P in this session’s
formal agenda. Hungary supports its inclusion as a
standing item on the Assembly’s agenda and the adoption
of a new resolution to reaffirm our commitment to
the principle.
Hungary shares the growing concerns of the
Secretary-General with regard to the negative
tendencies towards increasing numbers of victims
of atrocity crimes. We have to strengthen the United
Nations response by adopting specific measures to
improve the Organization’s internal coordination in the
area of R2P. That is why Hungary is strongly committed
to supporting the work of the Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to
Protect. We welcome efforts to mainstream R2P within
the United Nations system, including through the
framework of analysis for atrocity crimes.
Hungary also deems it especially important that
States put more emphasis on prevention through various
measures, including early warning, political mediation,
empowering victims of crimes, enhancing domestic
and international capacities for ending impunity and

finding new ways to ensure more effective compliance
with international humanitarian law.
As an active member of the Group of Friends of
R2P, both in New York and in Geneva, Hungary is
fully committed to raising awareness of the issue at
the national and international levels. Hungary hosts
the Budapest Centre for the International Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities, which is dedicated
to assisting in building a global architecture for the
prevention of atrocity crimes, focuses its activities
on education and the dissemination of the culture
of dialogue. The Centre has joined the European
Union-funded Words are Stones campaign in order to
take an active part in combating hate speech occurring
online. The Centre will take the lead in organizing a
training course for young people involved in social
media to increase awareness of cyberbullying among
the youth in Hungary. Hungary is also committed to
strengthening the Global Network of R2P Focal Points
in order to draw greater attention to our R2P actions.
We encourage all actors to appoint their focal points
and join that very important community.
We are of the view that the existing human rights
mechanisms, together with the Human Rights Up Front
initiative, can effectively contribute to timely action.
Hungary strongly supports utilizing the prevention
mechanisms of the Human Rights Council and, as
a current member, one of our priorities is to work
towards the prevention of these atrocities by focusing
special attention on the protection and promotion of
human rights.
Finally yet importantly, Hungary has been organizing
the Budapest Human Rights Forum for 11 years now,
bringing together Government representatives and
civil society. Hungary also established a human rights
working group in 2012 with the purpose of monitoring
respect for human rights in Hungary.
We believe that actions should be taken at both
the national and international levels. We therefore
support the work of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the
International Criminal Court to end impunity and bring
perpetrators to justice. As an active member of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
Hungary advocates voluntarily refraining from the use

of the veto in cases of mass atrocities, and encourages
all Member States that have not yet done so to sign the
code of conduct.
In conclusion, our ultimate goal should be to ensure
peaceful and secure living conditions for everyone
in their homelands without any possibility of being
victims of atrocity crimes. We share the opinion that
stronger political will is needed to make R2P a living
reality. We can assure the Assembly that our country
has that will and we will continue to encourage others
to implement the principle of R2P.
Mr. Kim (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea):
At the outset, I am confident that the discussion of the
agenda item on the responsibility to protect (R2P) and
the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity will be held in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and bring about good results under the
President’s leadership.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would like to take this opportunity to clarify
its position with regard to the agenda item as follows.
First, the issue of protecting people from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity falls entirely under the sovereignty of the
States concerned. R2P is a product of humanitarian
intervention, which has been rejected by the international
community in the past. State sovereignty is sacred and
inviolable. Respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and non-interference in their internal
affairs are cornerstones of international relations. R2P
violations of our principles are is nothing more than an
excuse to justify interference in the internal affairs of
the small and big countries.
Secondly, genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity can be attributed not to
States that do not have adequate ability to protect their
people, but rather to the flagrant infringement of State
sovereignty. The interference of Western countries in
States’ internal affairs creates upheavals such as arms
conflicts, terrorism, genocide and mass destruction,
which are long-standing in Middle Eastern and African
countries, including Syria, Iraq, Libya and so on. As
reality shows, it is a self-evident truth that developing
countries will fall victim to R2P.
If the United Nations, which is mandated to
establish a fair international order based on sovereign

equality, turns a blind eye to that reality and continues
to tolerate the false claims of Western countries, that
will obviously trigger more miserable outcomes. The
United Nations should no longer tolerate the sinister
schemes of Western countries that are pursuing
political, economic and military interventions in other
countries under the pretext of R2P.
In conclusion, the delegation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea hereby stresses that, in
international relations, the principle of the respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs should be
strictly upheld and the issue of R2P should be dealt with
in keeping with the common demands and interests of
all Member States.
Mr. Okaiteye (Ghana): Let me join previous
speakers in congratulating the Secretary-General on
the quality of his report (A/73/898) on the responsibility
to protect (R2P). Ghana aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect (see A/73/PV.93) and is
encouraged by the focus of the report on lessons
learned and taking stock of experience in prevention,
including the role of individual Member States and the
international community, which adequately reflects
the concerns Ghana shares with others regarding the
approach to the implementation of R2P.
We just commemorated the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide with a solemn
ceremony in this Hall. It was a moment that reminded
us of how the international community failed to protect
thousands of people in that country from genocide and
mass atrocities. It also brought back haunting memories
of similar crimes against humanity committed
elsewhere across the globe, even in the course of our
own lifetime. This debate, therefore, is important and
provides a forum for Member States to learn from other
experiences in the implementation of R2P.
My delegation continues to endorse the position
that the pace of implementation can be improved
through strengthened mechanisms for accountability
across the legal, moral and political spheres, together
with clearly defined relationships among the three
phases of the principle. Ghana will also continue to
advocate for consensus-building in the transformation
of conflict resolution, including the ongoing processes
of building resilient communities, resilient nations and

resilient regional communities in support of a resilient
global community.
In the multilateral setting, Ghana shares the
concerns raised in the report about the troubling decline
in international commitment to multilateralism, which
is affecting efforts to prevent atrocity crimes, and calls
for a more collaborative effort towards eliminating
this canker of atrocity crimes. In that connection,
Ghana encourages members of the Security Council
to utilize the Council’s working methods in bringing
potential mass atrocity situations into the Council for
consideration as early as possible. We also encourage
frequent briefings from the Secretary-General’s
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Responsibility to Protect regarding early warning
situations where populations are at risk of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. The victims of such crimes deserve better
and we, the international community, must not turn our
backs on them.
It is gratifying to note that the report commends the
efforts being made by the African Union (AU) in the
development of legal and institutional frameworks to
protect populations from serious crimes, as spelled out
in the responsibility to protect. It is worth mentioning
that the Constitutive Act of the AU specifically affirms
the right to intervene in respect of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which hinges on
the responsibility to protect. These are the practical
measures that Ghana is calling for in the protection
of the vulnerable against such heinous crimes. Never
again should the international community sit and watch
innocent populations being annihilated without any
protection. In calling for such protection, Ghana is
mindful of States’ sovereignty, but this sovereignty also
comes with a responsibility. In cases in which States
fail to uphold that responsibility, the vulnerable must
be protected by the international community through
international law.
It is in this context that Ghana continues to work
very closely with the delegations of like-minded States
to protect and promote both national and regional
ownership of R2P, with the support of the joint Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect,
the Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, the
International Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect
and other partners. Ghana calls on Member States that
have yet to appoint national R2P focal points to do so
and join the growing Global Network of R2P Focal

Points. Ghana also wishes to commend the 61 Member
States and two regional organizations — the European
Union and the Organization of American States — that
have appointed R2P focal points to date and are building
their national and collective capacities to prevent mass
atrocity crimes.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to call on
Member States to declare their support for R2P to
allow for all views to be considered in the preparation
of the report and outcome of this debate. Finally, Ghana
wishes to echo its statement made during the previous
debate (see A/72/PV.99), namely, that the combined
effect of the responsibility to protect, the responsibility
while protecting and the responsibility to remember
should help us to make progress in building resilience.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Membership
of the United Nations remains the ultimate symbol of
State independence and sovereignty. It is the stamp
of approval in the community of nations. The United
Nations is also the principal international forum
for cooperative action to achieve three fundamental
objectives:
State-building,
nation-building
and
economic development. The United Nations is therefore
the main arena to protect State sovereignty and not to
give it up.
We take note of the Secretary General’s report
(A/73/898) on the responsibility to protect (R2P) and
the noteworthy paragraphs therein. In a dangerous
world, which is characterized by inequality in power
and resources, sovereignty for many States is the best
line of defence and sometimes the only one. However,
sovereignty is more than just a functional principle in
international relations. For many States and peoples,
it is recognition of equality in status and dignity with
other States and peoples, as well as protection for their
unique identity and national freedom, in addition to
emphasizing their right to self-determination.
The concept of sovereignty as a responsibility
must not be interpreted as the possibility for any party
to intervene as long as the State is still standing and
able to exercise its authority and fulfil its obligations
towards its citizens. Paragraph 7 of Article 2 of the
Charter of the United Nations deals explicitly with
non-interference and does not include any clear reference
to humanitarian exception, as some would call it. It is
illegitimate to intervene in the internal affairs of States
based on international instruments and resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly. Non-interference

has a legal basis in international customary law through
many international, regional and bilateral instruments
that emphasize the prohibition of interference by a
State in the affairs of other States. Non-interference
is also ensured by general principles of law agreed by
civilized nations, as well as international organizations
and previous judicial judgments issued by international
courts such as the International Court of Justice.
Opinions of senior jurists as well as paragraphs 138
and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome document,
along with paragraphs 121 to 131, in which States
committed to improving and promoting human rights,
do not contain any explicit authorization or agreement
pertaining to the second or third pillar. All that warns
us against the threat of legalizing the right to interfere,
however good the intentions.
Efforts among States and the international
community must be concerted to eliminate the root
causes of internal conflicts. The required interference,
if we can call it that, means providing support to meet the
needs and political shortcomings, such as establishing
democracy and capacity-building; confidence-building
measures among communities and different groups;
and dealing with economic deprivation and a lack of
economic opportunities. Over the past three decades
there has been a dire need to decisively address the
causes of environmental deterioration, which has
become directly responsible for the outbreak of internal
conflicts. Assistance must include development
aid and cooperation in order to address inequality
in the distribution of resources and opportunities;
encouraging economic growth and opportunities;
improving terms of trade and allowing more goods from
developing economies to foreign markets; encouraging
the necessary economic and structural reform; and
providing technical support in order to strengthen
regulatory instruments and institutions.

and can be politicized and serve purposes and agendas
that have nothing to do with the basic and noble goal of
protecting civilians. It is observed from experience and
practice that certain organizations undertake political
exploitation in order to internationalize certain internal
issues by exaggerating some incidents or fabricating
others. Caution is therefore required because that
may increase tensions and have a negative impact on
achieving prevention.
The concept of R2P is a noble objective that States
undertake as a fundamental responsibility. It must not
be exploited as a political tool for attaining narrow
interests, causing suffering to civilians and legalizing
practices that contravene the principles of the Charter,
whose seventy-fifth anniversary we celebrated
yesterday, as well as international law. The primary
responsibility of a State is to protect its people from
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing, as well as incitement to perpetrate
those crimes. However, we cannot agree to grant some
States a blank cheque to intervene politically and
militarily in the internal affairs of States.
It is worth noting that there is no consensus on
the R2P concept. There remain concerns regarding its
definition, scope and implementation. We therefore
believe that more informal consultations, research,
analysis of causes and repercussions are needed.
Promoting the sovereignty of States and improving
the capability of the international community to
decisively respond when States are extensively violating
human rights and failing to protect their citizens are
two noble and fundamental objectives that need to be
reconciled. That requires further study and analysis,
as well as innovative solutions, under the umbrella of
international law.

Eliminating the root causes may also mean
enhancing legal protection and legal institutions. That
must include supporting efforts to strengthen the rule
of law and protect the independence and transparency
of the legal apparatus.

Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium associates itself with the statements
made by the observer of the European Union and
by the representative of Denmark on behalf of the
Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect
(see A/73/PV.93).

We must clearly state that the direct support
mentioned in the report from the international
community, especially the United Nations, to civil
society organizations in States without the prior
knowledge of or coordination with their Governments,
notwithstanding the important role of those
organizations in the area of prevention, is very dangerous

Belgium welcomes the convening of this formal
debate on the responsibility to protect. Last year, for the
first plenary debate in almost 10 years, many Member
States took the floor. The exchanges were very useful,
first, to identify the various tools at our disposal to
specifically implement the responsibility to protect at
the national and international levels and, secondly, to

better understand the differences in approach that can
sometimes exist among us on this issue.

last May, and we encourage those States and regional
organizations that have yet to do so to join this network.

Allow me to welcome the presence today of
Ms. Karen Smith, the new Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect.
She can count on Belgium’s full support. We welcome
the fact that, since the beginning of her term, she has
conducted extensive consultations, in particular at
the regional level, with all stakeholders on this issue.
We recognize that some trust may have been eroded
over time. However, we are also convinced that we
cannot remain silent if there is a risk of atrocities.
This conceptual debate should not prevent us from
working to operationalize the concept of responsibility
to protect.

Beyond the primary role to be played by States,
the report also recalled the commitment made in
2005 under which the international community must
intervene when national authorities are not able to fulfil
their responsibility to protect, or when they are clearly
not protecting their peoples.

The goal is first and foremost to respect the
commitments that we all made during the 2005 World
Summit. These cannot remain just wishful thinking
when each day peoples continue to be the victims of
atrocity crimes. This is why we must continue this
dialogue and adopt concrete measures when required.
It is in this spirit that this year my country calls once
again for the topic of the responsibility to protect to be
permanently inscribed on the agenda of the Assembly.
I wish to commend the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect
(A/73/898). The focus on the primary responsibility
of States to protect their peoples is timely and should,
we hope, eliminate any ambiguity on the subject. State
sovereignty is indeed no obstacle to the responsibility
to protect. On the contrary, these are two mutually
reinforcing concepts. The report thus rightly stresses
areas of action in which States have a key role to play.
In that respect, the review of the progress made
on Sustainable Development Goal 16 during the next
session of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development, which will begin in a few days, will offer
an excellent opportunity for States to share their best
practices and experiences in the promotion of peaceful
and inclusive societies by ensuring access for all to
justice and by establishing effective, responsible and
open institutions at all levels.
At the national level, the contributions of focal
points on R2P and the support provided by regional
organizations and civil society in building capacities
to prevent mass atrocities are undeniable. Belgium
has actively participated in the ninth meeting of focal
points organized by the European Union in Brussels

As a member of the Security Council since
1 January, Belgium is particularly focused on the
Council using the many tools at its disposal to act, both
formally and informally, in the prevention of atrocities.
As concerns early-warning systems, we also are of the
view that the Security Council must be periodically
informed, in an independent matter, about situations
that could lead to atrocity crimes. We are convinced
that the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect also can bring added
value on board in this context.
We also call for better coordination between
the deliberations of and the decisions taken by the
Security Council in New York and the United Nations
mechanisms and bodies in Geneva, including the High
Commissioner and the Human Rights Council. While
each has a specific mandate and works in respect of the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, their functional interaction must be enhanced
so as to ramp up the institutional capacity of the United
Nations in the area of conflict prevention.
We must recognize that human rights violations
can contribute to, or be at the root of, a conflict, as
reflected in the approach that is based on the three
pillars. We must also work to prevent the commission of
new atrocity crimes. While the fight against impunity
is first and foremost the responsibility of each State, the
Security Council must bolster its support for national
legal procedures and hybrid mechanisms, as well as for
the International Criminal Court, in particular for those
cases that it referred to the Court.
We pay tribute to the role played by the General
Assembly in the creation of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, as well as by the Human Rights Council in the
establishment of the independent international fact-

finding mission on Myanmar, following the inaction of
the Council in those cases.
Finally, when the Council establishes that a
situation involving mass atrocities exists, it must not
let disagreements between its permanent members lead
to inaction. That is why Belgium supports the FrenchMexican initiative to restrict the right to veto in cases of
atrocity crimes and has adhered to the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct.
We are pleased to see the level of support for these
complementary initiatives continue to grow; it is a sign
that the Council can no longer ignore.
We have made undeniable progress since 2005,
but it remains insufficient. Today Belgium calls on
all States Members of the United Nations to overcome
their differences and to individually and collectively
implement our responsibility to protect.
Ms. Van Baak (Netherlands): Let me first thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/73/898).
For the second consecutive year, this debate on
the responsibility to protect (R2P) is included in the
formal agenda of the General Assembly. To ensure a
continuous, constructive and sustainable dialogue, R2P
should be made a standing agenda item.
I especially would like to welcome Ms. Karen Smith
as the new Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Responsibility to Protect, a role she has carried out
actively since her appointment.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands also aligns itself
with the joint statement delivered by the representative
of Denmark on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, and with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union (see A/73/PV.93).
I would like to touch upon three points: prevention,
accountability and a different approach.
First, on prevention, when we talk about our
responsibility to protect populations from atrocity
crimes, much attention has, perhaps unfairly, been
put on the intervention aspect: how the international
community should act when such atrocities have
already been committed. However, the core aim of our
responsibility to protect is preventing such cruelties
from happening in the first place.
In this regard, I should like to emphasize the crucial
role of the Human Rights Council and of all the tools

at its disposal. Regular sessions, special procedures,
treaty bodies and the Universal Periodic Review help to
document patterns of human rights violations that might
escalate into mass atrocities. They provide us with
early-warning signs on which the High Commissioner
can brief the Human Rights Council and the Security
Council when necessary.
This valuable and essential interaction between
New York and Geneva needs a boost. The Security
Council should not ignore the possibility of being
adequately informed, and, moreover, it should not think
twice about taking timely and decisive action. Early
warnings must be answered with early action.
Where the commission of atrocity crimes could
not be prevented, the Security Council has to uphold
its responsibility to alleviate the suffering of the
peoples in conflict. This bring me to my second point:
accountability. We have to face reality. Despite public
attention and outrage over the many cases of the
most heinous crimes in the past, war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing still
occur. The horrible crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham are but one example. What
we can and must do is hold the perpetrators of such
crimes accountable.
As the host nation to the International Criminal
Court, the Netherlands relentlessly advocates for
ensuring accountability and upholding international
criminal law. Fact-finding, evidence-gathering,
investigation, attribution and, eventually, prosecution
are crucial processes in laying the groundwork for
present and future accountability. We need to end
cycles of impunity, thereby preventing recurrence.
Collective support for and cooperation with United
Nations accountability mechanisms are preconditions.
Lastly, I will say something about a new approach
to R2P.
Atrocity prevention does not stand on its own.
The core aim of the R2P principle transcends its label.
Prevention and protection of populations from the most
serious human rights violations touch on many different
areas of Government policy. If our response is to work
effectively, we need to understand the synergy between
R2P and related agendas, such as women and peace and
security, the protection of civilians, peacekeeping and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. With
regard to the latter, sustainable development will not be
achieved if we do not uphold the norms that safeguard

humanity and respect all universal human rights. That
requires a human-rights based approach in the way
we govern.
Efforts should be made not only by Member States,
domestically and collectively, but also within the
United Nations system itself. For example, the Human
Rights Up Front initiative, which is also mentioned by
the Secretary-General in his latest report on R2P, is of
great value in strengthening a United Nations systemwide, cross-pillar approach to mass atrocity prevention.
We support the call for more efficient and inclusive
United Nations and Member State engagement, also
involving local, national and regional organizations.
Enhancing United Nations inter-agency coordination,
as well as cooperation with regional actors and civil
society, is fundamental to developing a comprehensive
and context-specific prevention framework.
Today’s reality demands the strongest commitment
to the responsibility to protect. In order to save lives, the
international community must respond adequately. We
have the eyes, the ears and all means and mechanisms
to identify early warning signs. Collective political will
is the missing ingredient. We need to choose to act,
prioritize the prevention of mass atrocities and practice
what we preach.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank the President for convening this
meeting. Let me also express my deep appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his report (A/73/898), which
contains important conclusions and recommendations,
as well as an evaluation of the efforts of the international
community to put an end to atrocities and to ensure the
obligation of Member States towards accountability
and the rule of law.
I also commend the important role of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect (R2P), which
we have the honour to co-chair with Denmark. We
associate ourselves with the statement delivered today
on behalf of the Group (see A/73/PV.93).
This third formal General Assembly meeting on
R2P and the inclusion of R2P on its agenda reflect the
progress in the international community’s endorsement
of that principle and its determination to prevent
the crimes of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing. We commend the role
of the General Assembly in developing the principle of
R2P in accordance with the resolutions that have been
adopted to ensure accountability for the perpetrators

of atrocities, as reflected in the creation of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, as well as the Independent
Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar.
We believe that the commitment to implementing
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document is critically important to preventing
atrocities by relying on the three pillars of this
principle, with the aim of assisting States in shouldering
their responsibility to protect their population, the
responsibility of the international community to provide
assistance and the options available to respond to the
needs of protection in a timely and decisive manner. It
is therefore necessary for prevention to take the lead in
multilateral international efforts to prevent atrocities.
Despite the progress made in operationalizing the
principle of R2P, there is still an increasing need to
bolster the commitment to protecting the vulnerable
and to translating early warning into decisive action, as
part of the principle of prevention. It is also necessary
for national and international efforts to come together
in order to address the causes that contribute to those
atrocities, through respect for human rights, the rule of
law, social justice and the prevention of hate speech,
fighting extremism and achieving development. In that
respect, I note the important role of the United Nations
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The successes achieved in operationalizing
the principle of R2P require ending all kinds of
discrimination based on gender, as well as involving
women and organizations of the international
community in the early-warning process, while using
peacebuilding to create more coherent and inclusive
societies. We take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for all efforts undertaken by the Global
Centre for the Responsibility to Protect.
In keeping with the State of Qatar’s commitment
to international cooperation for achieving collective
security and with our policies and ongoing efforts to
curb grave violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, we have continued to work as
an effective member of the Group of Friends of R2P in
order to bolster this noble principle.
The focal point appointed by the Government
of the State of Qatar for R2P has continued to

effectively coordinate with its counterparts in the
States members of the Group. In that connection, in
April 2017 Doha hosted the seventh annual meeting of
the Global Network of R2P Focal Points. In January
2017, Doha also hosted a meeting to take up the issue
of accountability as a means to prevent atrocities,
as well as the role of R2P in combating violent
extremism, in cooperation with the Global Centre for
the Responsibility to Protect, the participation of the
States members of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
the joint Office of the United Nations Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and on R2P, as well as
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and a
number of governmental organizations. In that context,
the Center for Conflict and Humanitarian Studies at the
Doha Institute for Graduate Studies has undertaken an
important role in bolstering the principle of R2P and
respecting humanitarian law and human rights.
In conclusion, this formal meeting of the General
Assembly sends a very clear message that the
international community is determined to protect
civilians, confront atrocities decisively, end impunity
and hold those responsible for such crimes accountable.
The State of Qatar will continue to cooperate with
the international community to ensure respect
for international law and human rights as well as
maintenance of international peace and security.
Mrs. Vives Balmaña (Andorra) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the President for convening these meetings
on the responsibility to protect. I also welcome the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons learned
for prevention” (A/73/898), as well as its analysis,
conclusions and recommendations aimed at influencing
the implementation of the outcome of the 2005 World
Summit based on experience acquired since then.
In the face of crimes of atrocity, the range of
issues to be considered is broad. The responsibility
to protect against the most serious crimes means that
accountability and the exercise of justice as reparation
are unavoidable keys to responding to the victims
of these crimes. Accordingly, at the international
community level, the role played by the International
Criminal Court is of indispensable value.
As in so many other aspects, there are opposing
forces in this area. On the one hand, as the report
reminds us, important institutional and strategic
advances are being made by States, at the regional

level and in civil society. On the other hand, despite the
need for the international community to be prepared
to respond to such challenges, multilateralism can be
weakened by a lack of commitment. Undoubtedly, the
international community must be strengthened so as
to prevent atrocious crimes. At the United Nations,
Andorra has supported and continues to support the
French-Mexican initiative to refrain from using the
veto in the Security Council in such cases, as well as
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherency
and Transparency group.
In this regard, we would like concretely to emphasize
the value of education in prevention. In order to achieve
societies capable of creating and managing imaginations
and relationships, of developing themselves with
respect to and in recognition of the potential of each
individual and in training them for world citizenship, it
is necessary to have focus on the educational dimension,
so that it is appropriate and adapted to circumstances
and that it has an impact on values. Education is one
of the earliest forms of prevention as it can guarantee
values-based attitudes and behaviours as well as a
critical sense in conflict situations. Through UNESCO,
the United Nations agency for education and culture,
working with all Member States, the Organization has
a wide range of resources that can be applied not only
for students in the school setting but throughout life. As
for my country, Andorra, we give, as part of our policy
of international cooperation, our financial support to
actions that promote and develop education.
The report of the Secretary-General also highlights
how regional organizations play a role in spreading
political ideas that lead to good practices. One example
is the programme being developed by the Council of
Europe, “Education for democratic citizenship”, which
is an initiative sponsored by Andorra and falls within
the framework of Sustainable Development Goal 4.7,
which focuses on education for global citizenship. This
programme considers values, attitudes, skills and critical
understanding, while teaching conflict resolution and
the art of mediation starting from childhood. Through
inclusive education, the necessary skills for the
appreciation of the richness of diversity are taught so
that hate speech is seen as totally unacceptable.
If cultural heritages are respected and valued, no
one can claim superiority over others. In this regard,
the Secretary-General’s Strategy and Plan of Action on
Hate Speech is very timely and necessary. To achieve
these objectives, the root causes of such atrocities as

discrimination and inequality must be identified.
Knowing how they occur and, no less important, how
they are perceived, provide the guidelines for creating
specific programmes and call for the active participation
of communities, so that none is left out.
States, and indeed the whole world, count on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals as a practical guide
to shaping their policies. Although innovation is often
more easily associated with science- and technologyrelated objectives, innovative social initiatives are
necessary for developing mechanisms and attitudes that
foster such values as solidarity and cooperation, for
incorporating constructive relationships and facilitating
reconciliation. These approaches will be solid if they
are based on well-tested foundation of human rights,
which is a pillar of the United Nations. It is up to none
other than us.
Mrs. Koçyiğit Grba (Turkey): At a time when
atrocities committed in various corners of the world
persist in causing unprecedented human suffering, it is
essential for the international community to continue to
address the issue of preventing the occurrence of such
crimes. In this respect, we welcome the inclusion of
agenda item 168, “The responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity”, on the formal agenda of
the General Assembly again this session.
We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive annual report on the responsibility to
protect, this year entitled “Responsibility to protect:
lessons learned for prevention” (A/73/898), which
constitutes a solid basis for our deliberations today. We
also welcome the appointment of Ms. Karen Smith as
the new Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Responsibility to Protect.
At the 2005 World Summit, Member States made
a landmark commitment on their responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. The SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights the growing gap between our
words of commitment and the experience of protecting
vulnerable populations around the world. It is clear that
civilians are the ones that pay the highest price when
Member States fail to uphold their responsibility to
protect. In order to prevent and alleviate this immense
human suffering, the international community needs to

consider efficient ways and means to narrow the gap
between its commitments and actions.
In his report, the Secretary-General elaborates on
the role of the individual States and the engagement
of the international community in response to the
occurrence or risk or occurrence of atrocity crimes by
taking timely and sustained action. We appreciate his
recommendations and conclusions to this end.
In this context, the report cites guarantees of
non-recurrence, which involves addressing historic
cases of atrocity crimes, as one of the principal areas
to focus on to facilitate prevention of such crimes. We
believe that in order to establish the truth and build
mutual understanding, cases should be studied, taking
into account all their aspects, including their legal
dimension and historical background. In so doing,
it is essential that we proceed through dialogue, on
the basis of the cooperation and engagement of all
parties, including with the help of such platforms as
joint historical commissions. As rightly stated in the
report, we should respect diversity and peacefulness by
emphasizing different perspectives.
We also find it important that addressing hate
speech is included in the report as the first example of
an early action. Countering hate speech and bringing
perpetrators of hate crimes to justice is a collective
responsibility of States, communities and the private
sector. We acknowledge the development of the United
Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech
that was launched last week by the Secretary-General
as an important step forward and support his active
stance on this issue.
The responsibility to protect has yet to be
considered an established norm of international law,
and its scope and implementation need to be defined
and refined. The efforts in that regard should not be
carried out in a way that reinterprets or renegotiates
the well-established principles of international law
and the existing legal framework. Crimes of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity are well-defined legal concepts. We should
implement the relevant legal framework faithfully
and consistently. We should also bear in mind that
the concept of the responsibility to protect seeks to
establish a delicate balance between safeguarding the
humanitarian concerns of the international community
while respecting the principle of national sovereignty.
Pursuing a non-selective approach vis-à-vis the

implementation of the concept is relevant if we are
to achieve the widest possible consensus among the
membership on this important issue.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s approach,
which has a central focus on prevention. Indeed,
prevention is one of the most effective instruments in
our toolbox. Turkey believes that preventive policies
and mediation efforts should play a more prominent
role. In that understanding, Turkey pioneers mediation
efforts not only in the United Nations but also through
regional and bilateral initiatives. When efforts aimed
at prevention do not succeed, United Nations organs,
including the Security Council, must remain ready to
assume their responsibilities as enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. We hope that the discussions on
the responsibility to protect and its implementation will
also contribute to the efforts aimed at restraining the use
of the veto in the Security Council where crimes against
humanity and the crime of genocide are concerned.
Before concluding, I would like to underscore
that ensuring accountability for crimes that have been
committed should also be an indispensable component
of our discussions. Accountability is essential not only
to avoiding impunity and delivering justice but also to
preventing the recurrence of atrocities in the future.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): In 2005, we all agreed
that something must be done in order to protect
populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. However, despite
that commitment, thousands of people are still victims
of atrocities committed by their own Governments,
the very same Governments that are responsible for
their protection. Malta welcomes the inclusion of the
responsibility to protect on the formal agenda of the
General Assembly and hopes that these discussions will
allow us to continue to build on what has been achieved
so far. We also welcome the appointment of Ms. Karen
Smith as the new Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on the Responsibility to Protect and thank
Mr. Adama Dieng for his work as Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union (see A/73/PV.93) and would like to make a few
comments in its national capacity.
In recent years we have seen reports of attacks
on schools, medical facilities, civilian infrastructure
and the use of chemical weapons. Such actions are

completely unacceptable and constitute a serious
violation of international law and international
humanitarian law. As we have seen far too often
throughout history, the effects of war loom long after
the fighting has ended. It can take years to rebuild
infrastructure; it can take decades for the environment
to regenerate; and it can take generations for wounds
that result from the deliberate targeting of ethnic groups
to heal. Ensuring accountability for atrocity crimes is
of fundamental importance.
Every year, thousands of people in different parts
of the world are forced to leave their homes and embark
on dangerous journeys in the hope of finding normality
and dignity. It is our duty to help and protect people who
feel the need to undertake such journeys in the hope of
finding a peaceful and secure place for their families.
However, in doing so, we cannot forget the root causes
that are forcing them to take such drastic action or the
social and economic strain that forced displacement can
have on regional stability and international security.
In his report (A/73/898), the Secretary-General
underlines the importance of having effective early
warning and early action systems, while a recent
World Bank report shows that for every dollar spent on
prevention, up to $7 can be saved in the long term. Civil
society, regional and subregional organizations have a
crucial role to play in that regard and closer cooperation
with the United Nations can help to identify risks at a
much earlier stage.
To ensure that existing tools for action are not
encumbered with bureaucracy and hindered by rhetoric,
a more proactive approach is warranted. While States
have the fundamental responsibility for protecting their
own citizens, the international community cannot afford
to look the other way when faced with genocide, ethnic
cleansing, crimes against humanity and war crimes. In
failing to show a determined and united front, we will
fail not only our forefathers, who strived to ensure that
we did not relive the atrocities that they had to witness,
but also future generations, who will wonder how we
managed to say so much, yet stand so still when faced
with such horrific events.
Ms. Prizreni (Albania): Albania aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union (see A/73/PV.93). I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacity.
Albania congratulates the General Assembly
on its widespread support for the principle of the

responsibility to protect (R2P) and on having a formal
plenary meeting on the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, reaffirming that there
is a great need to address the increasing number of
contemporary atrocity situations around the world.
I would also like to reiterate what I said on behalf of
my delegation at last year’s meeting (see A/72/PV.105),
namely, that R2P should be a standing item on the
General Assembly agenda.

Albania also recognizes the added value of women
in conflict prevention. In September 2018, the Albanian
Government therefore adopted its first national action
plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The action plan aims to integrate
the gender perspective into our national, foreign
and security policies, providing a comprehensive
legal framework to promote and increase women’s
participation in political and public life, as well as in
the security sector.

Albania would also like to encourage the members
of the Security Council to have an open debate on
the responsibility to protect, as well as to include the
issue in the briefings of the Special Advisers to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect with regard to early
warning of situations where populations are at risk
of war crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity. Albania also call for the appropriate
use of diplomatic and other means to implement R2P
and early prevention.

Attention has been paid to mainstreaming a gendersensitive approach in the training of civil, police and
military personnel, with a special focus on prevention.
In that regard, I would also like to praise the spirit of
the first two Albanian female peacekeepers in South
Sudan, Viola Hoxha and Valentina Korbi, who believe
that their mission is to help others in facilitating
the establishment of contacts with the local female
population, developing their capacities and making
them relevant to society.

Furthermore, my country welcomes the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General on R2P (A/73/898)
and its focus on prevention. We consider it a call to the
international community to do more to help States as
they address weaknesses in their capacity to prevent
atrocities, including through assistance for more
effective holistic prevention policies.
Albania is a supporter of R2P and the implementation
of its three pillars and its operationalization. We
appointed a focal point for R2P within the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Albania. The role provides for
the promotion of R2P at the national level and support
for international cooperation through participation in
the Global Network of R2P Focal Points. The focal
point also shares information and coordinates the
institutions on conceptual issues of the three pillars
of the responsibility to protect and its challenges,
such as State responsibility and prevention, within the
national context. Furthermore, the focal point assesses
the requirement for the development of a national plan
of action on R2P, including with regard to awareness,
risk assessment, capacity-building, early warning,
monitoring and the identification of institutional
structures to implement R2P in practice and ensure
early prevention and of the capacities needed at a
central level to prevent mass atrocities and their role in
early prevention.

Human Rights Council resolution A/HRC/38/18
recognizes the contribution that the Human Rights
Council makes to the prevention of human rights
violations, including through dialogue and cooperation
and by responding promptly to human rights
emergencies. Furthermore, the resolution emphasizes
that development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. In other words,
it emphasizes that long-term peace and sustainable
development are not possible where human rights are
violated, particularly without the implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 16. In that regard, the
further strengthening of links between the Human
Rights Council and the Security Council regarding
early warning and early action are very necessary.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the chairs of fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry should participate in Security
Council briefings, as required.
To that end, I would like to emphasize the conclusion
of the Secretary-General’s report with regard to the
fact that, in upholding their primary responsibility to
protect, States can implement measures to strengthen
their national resilience to atrocities. We can assist each
other in implementing initiatives aimed at reducing
atrocity risks and we all can do more to consistently
translate early warning into early preventive action.

Mr. Colaço Pinto Machado (Portugal): It is with
great pleasure that I address the General Assembly on
behalf of Portugal on this topic of the utmost importance
as a universal principle to all States.
We are fully aligned with the statement delivered
this morning by the observer of the European Union
(see A/73/PV.93), and I would like to add some remarks
in my national capacity.
Let me first thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/73/898) and praise his commitment to
advancing the responsibility to protect (R2P). Portugal
embraces the collective responsibility to support
States in implementing initiatives to reduce the risk of
atrocity crimes and to translate early warning into early
preventive action.
We also take this opportunity to reaffirm our full
support for the United Nations Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, and
welcome the appointment of Ms. Karen Smith as the
new Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on R2P.
The responsibility to protect cannot be understood
only as an international issue where the responsibility
belongs to the international community. In fact, the
primary role of prevention and protection of the
population against atrocity crimes belongs to States.
Portugal views the responsibility to protect
as a humanitarian commitment of States towards
their peoples and the international community. The
effectiveness of the principle is dependent primarily
on the political will to prevent, to raise awareness,
to promote debate and to find solutions to ongoing
atrocity crimes.
Emphasis should be placed on early prevention
action. That includes addressing socioeconomic
inequalities, promoting the rule of law, ensuring access
to education, ensuring strong democratic institutions
and the sharing of political power, addressing ethnic
mistrust and violence, implementing economic policies
focused on sustainable development and preserving
natural resources and their fair use.
The Security Council has a critical role in
enforcing the responsibility to protect in situations
where prevention has failed and the population is
already in danger. In such cases, the Security Council
has in principle a responsibility to act, including by
authorizing the use of force under Chapter VII of the

Charter of the United Nations and the relevant rules of
international humanitarian law.
However, there are no clear guidelines for such
situations. Governments have agreed to discuss the issue
on a case-by-case basis. That favours inconsistency. In
certain situations R2P is not invoked despite evidence
of atrocity crimes being committed and the Government
authorities being unwilling or unable to act. Such
inconsistency ultimately weakens the relevance of the
responsibility to protect and its tools.
One way to make the responsibility to protect more
effective would be to further explore and reinforce its
interconnection with the responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts. The responsibility to
protect their population is an obligation of States under
international law, which results from human rights
conventions and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. An act or omission of a State in the fulfilment
of those obligations is a wrongful act that entails the
State’s international responsibility with all related
legal consequences.
In our view, highlighting and enhancing the
connection between R2P and the responsibility of
States would bring more clarity and enforcement to the
responsibility of States to protect. Adopting the 2001
articles on responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts as an international convention would
certainly contribute to that goal.
The United Nations has an important role to play
in developing R2P and its tools to prevent and act in
situations where atrocity crimes are being committed.
However, we should not forget that the primary
responsibility rests with States.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking the President through you, Sir, for convening
this important plenary meeting today, which marks the
third General Assembly debate on the responsibility to
protect (R2P). We align our statement with the statement
made this morning by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect (see A/73/PV.93). We welcome the appointment
of Ms. Karen Smith as Special Adviser on R2P and
appreciate the efforts of Mr. Adama Dieng, Special
Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.
Bangladesh welcomes the inclusion of the
responsibility to protect and the prevention of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against

humanity on the formal agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session and support its inclusion as a
standing item on the General Assembly agenda.

the States that unwilling to live up to their commitment
to civilian protection. The plight of the Rohingya in
Myanmar is a case in point.

The discussions this morning were indicative of
the possible synergies and complementarities among
the United Nations humanitarian response, sustainable
development agenda, peacekeeping and sustaining
peace initiatives towards atrocity prevention. There
is evident scope for better utilizing the various
human rights institutional mechanisms for supporting
evidence-based risk assessment, early warning and
mitigation measures.

There is no denying that what has happened,
namely, the violence against Rohingya population, is
not new; neither was it a surprise. It is abundantly clear
that international crimes were committed in Myanmar.
Rohingya Muslims have been killed, tortured, raped,
burned alive and humiliated solely because of who
they are. The international community has been in
agreement that the targeted ethnic cleansing of the
Rohingya in fact took place. Indeed, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights labelled it as a
textbook example of ethnic cleansing.

As a troop-contributing country, Bangladesh
underscores the importance of clear and achievable
mandates for the protection of civilians by peacekeeping
missions and the provision of the corresponding
resources and capacity. We would like to report that
Bangladesh is participating in five of the eight current
United Nations missions that have a protection of
civilians mandate. We also maintain our in-principle
support for a possible suspension of the veto in the case
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity.
Bangladesh has always been supportive of the
Secretary-General’s clear-sighted approach to place
atrocity prevention as the centrepiece of his prevention
agenda, elaborated in his reports. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the Security Council should
collectively reflect on its role in atrocity prevention. We
also appreciate the suggested roles of the international
community that the Secretary-General has mentioned
in his 2019 report (A/73/898) on addressing hate
speech, providing support to national authorities in
strengthening their capacity to prevent atrocity crimes,
humanitarian action to help address the indirect effect
of atrocity crimes, engagement with religious leaders
and actors and providing support to local human
rights organizations and to women’s and youth groups,
et cetera.
There is a debate about whether it is possible to
effectively implement the principles of responsibility to
protect in view of the suffering of millions of people
from atrocity crimes. As we take stock of prevention
of atrocity crime since global leaders adopted this
principle in 2005, we have not seen much success in
prevention of genocides, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. I would like to emphasize
that the failure of our R2P is not in its principles, but in

With the availability of technological and other
resources, early warning is rarely the problem.
However, United Nations mechanisms in Myanmar
could not provide early warning, as the problem
was even bigger. Surprisingly, it was not the lack of
warning, but the lack of a timely response that was the
problem. Very recently, we have come to know in detail
from the Rosenthal report why and where the United
Nations failed.
We strongly suggest that accountability for the
crimes that have been committed is necessary. I
urge the international community, in particular the
Security Council, to consider different accountability
options. The world needs to show that it is not ready
to tolerate such barbaric acts. Unfortunately, we
have not yet seen any determined commitment of the
international community to compel Myanmar to admit
its responsibility to protect populations from atrocity
crimes in Myanmar, nor have we seen any serious efforts
of countries that matter to come forward with support
as mentioned in Pillar Two of the R2P principles.
There has been a great deal of talk, as there always
is, condemning actions, making expectations clear,
expressing alarm, welcoming cooperation and so on.
We all know the Government of Myanmar failed in all
aspects. It failed to protect its own people. It failed to
implement fully the recommendations of the Rakhine
Advisory Commission’s road map. It failed to totally
cooperate at the bilateral level or with the international
community, the Special Rapporteur, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Envoy and the United Nations
Independent International Fact-Finding Mission
on Myanmar.

On the other hand, we all collectively failed to
act in a timely and decisive manner. We helplessly
observed the Rohingya fleeing persecution and atrocity
crimes. Without the bold leadership demonstrated by
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina — also popularly known
as the Mother of Humanity for her generosity — these
persecuted people had nowhere to turn.. In this regard,
let me read from the report entitled “A Brief and
Independent Inquiry into the Involvement of the United
Nations in Myanmar from 2010 to 2018” by Mr. Gert
Rosenthal, which has been shared with the Assembly:
“It must also be said that the collective membership
of the United Nations, represented by the Security
Council, bears part of that responsibility, by not
providing enough support to the Secretariat when
such backing was and continues to be essential. If
there is one single action that might have altered
the course of events in Myanmar it would have
been the timely and impartial presence in Rakhine
state of some type of United Nations observatory
that would offer a measure of confidence to the
oppressed minorities that their basic human rights
would be respected, and that the root causes that
led to their forced emigration would be addressed
by the national authorities.”
Despite our failure to prevent atrocities in Myanmar,
we firmly believe that we still have the opportunity
to compensate. Moving forward, the international
community, led by the United Nations, while needing to
recommit to its goals of atrocity prevention, may look
into the possibility of exploring the remaining options
in pillar III of the R2P principles.
Let me reaffirm our commitment in this Hall and
before the Assembly that despite clear and visible
social and economic constraints and the environmental
impact that the influx of Rohingya has been placing
on the Cox’s Bazar area and the host communities in
Bangladesh, we will continue to protect and support
them until their voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return to Myanmar. We must not fail the
Rohingya population. The solution to this problem lies
first and foremost in the Myanmar authorities, who will
have to resolve it by creating conditions conducive for
the Rohingya population to return home in safety.
The international community also has a
responsibility to protect this population from the risk
of further atrocity crimes. Under present conditions,
returning to Myanmar will put the Rohingya population

at risk of further crimes. However, accepting the current
status quo would be a victory for those who planned
and carried out the attacks in the first place. We must
not accept either of these scenarios.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the President for organizing
this formal debate of the General Assembly on the
responsibility to protect, the third since 2009. Indeed,
the inclusion of the responsibility to protect on the
official agenda of the United Nations over the past two
years reflects the strong interest of Member States in
sharing ideas and good practices in this area, including
the collective power to improve the international
community’s capacity to prevent genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.
My delegation takes note of the latest report of the
Secretary-General (A/73/898), entitled “Responsibility
to protect: lessons learned for prevention”, which pays
particular attention to prevention and early warning
and action, and recognizes that the responsibility to
protect is a key element of this important process.
It is clear that the international community has
come a long way in the field of protection, both in terms
of peacekeeping, respect for and promotion of human
rights, democracy and the rule of law, and in terms of
preventing atrocities. Accordingly, this debate offers
Member States an important opportunity to share their
experiences, good practices and effective strategies
to prevent atrocities. In addition, it is important to
reiterate that the responsibility to protect involves the
State and its institutions. The various components of
society must have a code of ethics aimed at promoting
tolerance and coexistence and promoting intercultural
and interreligious dialogue. Allow me to point out
that nearly one third of Member States, including the
Kingdom of Morocco, have appointed a national focal
point on the responsibility to protect, making this global
network the largest governmental network dedicated to
the prevention of mass atrocities.
I would now like to express my delegation’s
view on the following points. First, we recall the
intersecting relationship between the three pillars of
the responsibility to protect and reiterate that the third
is primarily the responsibility of States. Nevertheless,
it must be noted that in times of conflict, the capacities
of these States may be insufficient or even non-existent.
In these cases, the international community can support
them by building their capacities by providing them with

the necessary means to protect their own populations.
This can be achieved, in particular, by strengthening
legal instruments and consolidating democracy and the
rule of law. Capacity-building for technical assistance
is indeed an important preventive measure.
Secondly, States are required to fulfil their
obligations to combat impunity, as well as to conduct
full investigations and prosecute anyone responsible
for mass atrocity crimes in order to prevent their
recurrence. In this sense, national accountability
efforts must be encouraged and supported, in particular
by strengthening judicial cooperation among States.
Thirdly, we encourage the various United Nations
bodies to make better use of the instruments at their
disposal, to act in a timely and decisive manner to
prevent mass atrocities and strengthen international
accountability. Important mechanisms such as the
Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) are well placed to support prevention efforts.
We encourage Member States to make better use of the
UPR process as a preventive mechanism.
Finally, we believe that it would be desirable
to favour a preventive approach in order to assess

threats and coordinate actions while avoiding any
degradation of the situation in question. The preventive
dimension can be developed through capacity-building
in the countries concerned, respect for the rule of law,
ensuring good governance, entrenching the culture of
human rights and setting up early-warning mechanisms
to detect pre-conflict situations and avoid their
transformation into open and deadly confrontations.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Morocco shares
the Secretary-General’s firm conviction that the
responsibility to protect necessarily implies the
strengthening of democracy and the rule of law as well
as the implementation of provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Morocco
supports the Secretary-General in his efforts aimed
at promoting peace, security, conflict prevention and
the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as the
development and respect for human rights.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate for this meeting. We
shall hear the remaining speakers tomorrow morning at
10 a.m. here in the Hall.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

