Seventy-third session

93rd plenary meeting

Thursday, 27 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 168
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/898)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 70 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, I now give the floor to Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the Executive Office
of the Secretary-General, to make a statement on behalf
of the Secretary-General.
Ms. Ribeiro Viotti: I welcome this formal debate
of the General Assembly on the responsibility to
protect. World leaders unanimously endorsed the
responsibility to protect at the 2005 World Summit. That
was a breakthrough following genocides in Rwanda
and Srebrenica a decade before. The imperative was
clear: do more to protect people, and do so as a united
international community.
Fourteen years later, atrocity crimes, regrettably,
plague us still. Civilians, including women and
children, are being killed, either deliberately or as
victims of indiscriminate attacks. We are seeing
rampant sexual violence, the denial of life-saving aid
and the widespread and systematic targeting of specific
ethnic groups, which could amount to acts of genocide.
Just a few days ago, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees reported the highest

levels of forced displacement on record. We must do
more — and we must do better — to reverse those
negative trends.
None of those crimes is inevitable, or a by-product
of conflict. Atrocity crimes are preventable and can
never be justified. The prevention of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
remains both a collective priority and an enduring
challenge. It is important to build the consensus to
mount desperately needed responses to ease suffering
and end violence.
Yet we must also acknowledge that there are
concerns that the principle could be used to take
collective action for purposes other than those agreed
in the World Summit Outcome document. There are
also concerns about possible double standards and the
selective use of the principle in the past. That is why
open and frank exchanges such as this are necessary
to dispel misconceptions and mistrust. We must forge
mutual understanding and establish stronger support for
the responsibility to protect as a key tool of protection
and prevention. Let us remember three key elements.
First, the primary responsibility for protecting
people rests with States. As the World Summit Outcome
document states,
“Each individual State has the responsibility to
protect its populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
This responsibility entails the prevention of such
crimes, including their incitement ... We accept that

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

responsibility and will act in accordance with it.”
(resolution 60/1, para. 138)
Secondly, the international community has a
responsibility to support States in fulfilling that task.
The World Summit Outcome document also states that
“The international community, through the
United Nations, also has the responsibility to use
appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other
peaceful means, in accordance with Chapters VI and
VIII of the Charter, to help to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.” (ibid., para. 139)
The United Nations will continue to support
Member States, especially those that might be facing
fragility and stress, in strengthening institutions,
defending human rights and fortifying social cohesion.
That is an essential part of the Secretary-General’s
prevention agenda. The Office of his Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Office on the
Responsibility to Protect provide support in that regard.
We know that hate speech is often a precursor
to atrocity crimes. Earlier this month, the SecretaryGeneral launched an ambitious United Nations strategy
and plan of action on hate speech to coordinate efforts
across the United Nations system to identify, prevent
and confront hate speech, using all the means in
our power.
Thirdly, only when peaceful means have been
exhausted and national authorities have manifestly
failed to protect their populations might there be a
responsibility for further action. The outcome document
stipulates that any such action is to be carried out
“through the Security Council, in accordance with
the Charter including Chapter VII, on a case by
case basis” (ibid., para 139).
Our overarching challenge is to uphold the principle
while preventing its misuse. That means acting
promptly, preventively and diplomatically before
situations escalate and spiral out of control.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/898) responds to the call by many Member States
to identify lessons learned and positive examples of
prevention. The report outlines a number of specific
areas for concrete action, including addressing hate
speech, strengthening protection of civilians mandates
and nurturing the values of diversity and inclusion. The

report encourages initiatives to ensure that preventive
efforts reach rural and marginalized areas. The report
also reminds us of recent key lessons.
First, more needs to be done to translate early
warning on atrocity crimes into decisive early action
towards prevention.
Secondly, States have the primary responsibility to
protect their populations and are well-placed to take the
earliest action to prevent atrocity crimes.
Thirdly, more needs to be done to actively support
initiatives aimed at reducing the risk of atrocity crimes,
as well as in support of regional initiatives to prevent
and respond to atrocity crimes.
At the country level, States can conduct national
assessments of risk and resilience, which can be done
as part of existing processes, such as the Universal
Periodic Review, or as a stand-alone exercise. At
the international level, States can actively support
initiatives aimed at reducing the risk of atrocity crimes
or responding to the evidence that such crimes might be
imminent, including by strengthening partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations. At the United
Nations, the Secretary-General remains committed
to the integration of prevention in agendas connected
to our three pillars of work, namely, sustainable
development, human rights and peace and security.
The General Assembly is the primary
intergovernmental body for deliberation on the
responsibility to protect. I reiterate the importance of
Member States’ active participation in, and support
for, the action of intergovernmental bodies to prevent
atrocity crimes, including by making better use of
the tools at their disposal. Together, let us deliver our
collective responsibility to protect.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Chef
de Cabinet for her statement on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral and for the valuable information contained in
the report under consideration today.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect (R2P), which
consists of 51 Member States and the European Union,
which this year is co- chaired by Qatar and Denmark.
Today marks the third formal debate at the General
Assembly on the responsibility to protect. We welcome
the support of States Members of the United Nations

for the inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda over the
past two years. It also reflects the strong interest among
Member States to share ideas and best practices about
how we can collectively improve our ability to prevent
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing.
We believe that the General Assembly should
continue this practice of open and frank debate, one
repeatedly recommended by the Secretary-General.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
responsibility to protect (A/73/898) takes stock of past
practice and includes lessons learned for prevention.
The Group welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations for implementing and integrating
the responsibility to protect as an important part of
his broader strategy to prioritize prevention across all
pillars of the work of the United Nations. We appreciate
his sustained commitment to the implementation of the
Human Rights Up Front initiative, thereby strengthening
the United Nations system’s ability to prevent the
most serious human rights violations from happening,
including those that possibly lead to the commission of
atrocities. The Group commends the Secretary-General
and his Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect for their leadership in
advancing mass atrocity prevention. As this is the first
time that Ms. Smith joins us in the General Assembly
as Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, we
would especially like to welcome her.
Since 2005, considerable progress has been
achieved by Member States and other stakeholders,
including civil society, in advancing atrocity
prevention at the national, regional and international
levels. International and domestic actors have
successfully created frameworks to identify triggers
and risks in order to develop indicators and earlywarning mechanisms and institutionalize prevention
mechanisms and partnerships.
As the Group of Friends, we have also worked
towards conceptually linking R2P, where appropriate,
to other related agendas, including peacekeeping, the
protection of civilians, women and peace and security,
sustaining peace and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Sustainable Development Goals.
Today’s formal debate provides States with an important
opportunity to share experiences, best practices and
effective strategies for preventing atrocities. In that
context, it is worth highlighting that almost one third
of all Members States have appointed a national R2P

focal point and joined the Global Network of R2P Focal
Points, the largest governmental network dedicated to
preventing mass atrocities.
We are currently witnessing a divided Security
Council, unable to take timely and decisive action
with regard to multiple atrocity situations. At the
same time, however, the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council can play an important role in
responding to atrocity crimes, as demonstrated by
the establishment of the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. That
success is a direct result of concerted efforts by
Member States committed to holding those responsible
for atrocities accountable for their actions.
We recognize that the primary responsibility to
protect lies with Member States. But, should peaceful
means be inadequate and national authorities manifestly
fail to protect their populations, the international
community should be prepared to take collective action
in a timely and decisive manner through the Security
Council. We also commend the initiatives of Member
States to bring the perpetrators of atrocity crimes to
justice. Such crimes include war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, as reflected in the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.
Domestic accountability measures for atrocities
are among the most effective ways to prevent
recurrence. States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute genocide, torture and other
such crimes committed within their jurisdictions.
National accountability efforts should be encouraged
and supported, including through the strengthening
of judicial cooperation among States. Fact-finding
missions, investigative mechanisms, commissions
of inquiry and hybrid and international courts and
tribunals provide complementary avenues to enable
accountability when and where options under domestic
law prove insufficient.
While accountability is important to prevent
recurrence, our ultimate objective is to prevent atrocity
crimes from occurring in the first place. Prevention
is at the core of each of the three pillars of R2P.
Member States should identify complementary agendas
where United Nations efforts can assist in preventing
atrocities. For example, the interaction between the

Human Rights Council and the Security Council
could be strengthened to better inform the latter about
situations that may lead to atrocity crimes. Measures
taken by States to prevent atrocity crimes can also
contribute to national and regional peace and stability
and reinforce national sovereignty.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
provides a framework for global cooperation. It is a
framework for achieving a better and more sustainable
future, one that can provide and significantly
contribute to atrocity prevention efforts. Eradicating
poverty, providing development assistance and
supporting capacity- and institution-building can
address grievances and instability that may drive the
perpetration of atrocity crimes. No country or region
is immune to the risk factors for atrocity crimes. We
are increasingly concerned about the rising levels of
incitement to discrimination, hostility and violence in
all its forms, as well as hate speech and xenophobia,
which we see in many parts of the world. As SecretaryGeneral António Guterres has said, hatred is a threat to
everyone and is therefore a job for everyone.
We also strongly support an inclusive approach
to preventing atrocity crimes, one that recognizes
the critical role women play in early warning and in
promoting peacebuilding, peacekeeping, capacitybuilding and more cohesive, inclusive and resilient
societies. We should take concrete steps to end all
forms of gender-based discrimination and violence
and work to empower women as agents of change,
including by ensuring that all women have access to
quality education and meaningful participation in the
decision-making processes affecting their lives. We
recognize the important role national and international
civil society organizations play in supporting the
advancement and the implementation of R2P. In
particular, we would like to thank the Global Centre
for the Responsibility to Protect for its invaluable work
as the secretariat of the Group of Friends, both in New
York and in Geneva.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the number of forcibly
displaced people as a result of persecution, conflict and
atrocities is at its highest level since the end of the Second
World War — 70.8 million in 2018 — and the number
continues to increase. That number demonstrates why
upholding the responsibility to protect needs to be at the
very heart of our shared mission to advance peace and
security. During today’s formal debate, we look forward

to hearing from Member States on best practices to
end the current climate of impunity and inaction with
regard to the heightened risk of atrocity crimes across
the globe. Let today’s debate be a reminder of the
importance of continuing that exchange of information
and the need to strengthen our individual and collective
prevention and accountability response.
Let me conclude by saying that the era of
indifference is over, but the time of consistent and
timely action to prevent and protect has not yet begun.
As the Secretary-General notes repeatedly in his report,
more needs to be done. Let us speed the day.
Mr. Vale de Almeida (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 28 member States. The candidate countries
the Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and
Albania, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
At the World Summit 14 years ago, all States
Members of the United Nations endorsed the principle
of a shared responsibility to protect populations from
genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. Since 2005, the European Union has been
a staunch supporter of the responsibility to protect. We
warmly welcome the inclusion of a dedicated debate on
this issue in the formal agenda of the General Assembly
again this year. We believe that it reflects the topic’s
importance and allows us to have a full exchange on the
current state of affairs in atrocity prevention. We thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his report
entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons learned for
prevention” (A/73/898).
There have been important developments since last
year’s debate. We warmly welcome the appointment
of Ms. Karen Smith as the new Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect, as
well as the active role that she has played since taking
up her position. We thank Mr. Adama Dieng, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, for his leadership in the development of
the United Nations strategy and plan of action on hate
speech, which was launched very recently.
In his report on the responsibility to protect,
the Secretary-General rightly concludes that, while
States have the primary responsibility to protect their
populations, more needs to be done at the international
level. We must make greater efforts to reduce the risk
of atrocity crimes and respond promptly to evidence of

their imminent commission. International and regional
organizations have a unique role to play in preventing
and responding to mass atrocities. As highlighted in
the Secretary-General’s report, the European Union
recently co-hosted, with the Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect, the ninth annual meeting
of the Global Network of Responsibility to Protect
Focal Points. This year’s meeting had an explicit
focus on the specific role that regional organizations
can play in the promotion and implementation of the
responsibility to protect. It brought together a crossregional group of senior Government officials from
more than 45 countries, as well as representatives of the
United Nations, the Organization of American States,
the African Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe.

humanitarian law. A robust human rights culture within
the United Nations system is crucial to fulfilling our
responsibility to protect.

As the first regional organization to formally appoint
a responsibility to protect focal point, the European
Union warmly welcomes the recent appointment of a
focal point for the Organization of American States.
We strongly encourage other regional organizations, as
well as Member States, to do exactly the same, namely,
appoint focal points that will follow the issue of the
responsibility to protect as closely as possible.

We must continue to promote accountability for
atrocity crimes. The European Union and its member
States remain committed to the efforts at the national
and international levels to end impunity for the crime
of genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. We reiterate our firm support to the
international criminal justice system and its institutions.
International courts and hybrid tribunals can play an
important role where States are unwilling or genuinely
unable to do so. We actively promote the universality
of the Rome Statute and, through our support for the
International Criminal Court, we foster capacities for
accountability and reconciliation, which we all know
are key elements for non-recurrence. We encourage the
Security Council to consider carefully the possibility
offered by the Rome Statute to refer situations to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.

It is also vital that the Security Council use
available tools in the exercise of its responsibility to
protect populations from mass atrocities. We welcome
the Arria Formula meeting on raising the effectiveness
of atrocity crimes prevention convened by Poland — a
State member of the European Union — last December.
Participants at the meeting highlighted some practical
actions on atrocity prevention that could be taken by
the Security Council. In that respect, we acknowledge
and welcome the initiatives aimed at ensuring that the
Security Council is able to effectively prevent or put
an end to situations involving the commission of mass
atrocities, including the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct, and the initiative
on the suspension of the veto in cases of mass atrocities
presented by France and Mexico.
The Human Rights Council, human rights treaty
bodies at large and mechanisms involved must be
further mobilized in the prevention of atrocities.
Their interaction with the Security Council could be
strengthened to better inform the latter about situations
that may lead to atrocity crimes. The Human Rights
Up Front initiative also has an important role to
play in enhancing system-wide capacity to prevent
mass violations of human rights and international

The European Union supports the operationalization
of the concept of the responsibility to protect through
an integrated approach, including diplomatic support at
the bilateral and multilateral levels, transitional justice
and accountability, human rights, conflict prevention
and mediation, as well as development assistance and
humanitarian aid. Last year we launched a new EU
toolkit on the responsibility to protect and atrocity
prevention — an instrument that offers practical guidance
on atrocity prevention to our delegations, missions and
operations. We are certainly willing and able to share
that toolkit with the international community.

The responsibility to protect is not only about
international responses to domestic crises, but very
much also about domestic prevention of home-grown
risks. The European Union’s framework decision on
combating racism and xenophobia criminalizes public
incitement to violence or hatred directed against a
group of persons or a member of such a group defined
by reference to race, colour, religion, descent or
national or ethnic origin. As defined in the framework
decision, hate speech is a criminal offence, including
when it occurs online. The European Union, its member
States, social media companies and other platforms
share a collective responsibility to ensure that the
Internet does not become a safe haven for incitement to
violence and hatred, while at the same time promoting
and facilitating freedom of expression online.

In conclusion, there are obviously no easy
solutions. But the Secretary-General’s report rightly
calls for decisive early action towards prevention in
order to close the gap between our stated commitment
to the responsibility to protect and the daily experience
of vulnerable populations around the world. To close
that gap, we must ensure that the responsibility to
protect is operationalized and implemented in practice.
The European Union is committed to working with all
stakeholders to help make that a reality. We once again
welcome this debate and encourage further dialogue
in the General Assembly as we continue to work with
our international partners to fulfil the responsibility to
protect that we embraced back in 2005.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of
France and my own country, Mexico, in our capacity
as promoters of the French-Mexican initiative on the
suspension of the veto in cases of mass atrocities.
States have the primary responsibility to protect
their peoples. Protecting the population from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity is not a matter of political will, but an
obligation under international law. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (A/73/898), which
reaffirms the relevance of this agenda for his broader
strategy that prioritizes prevention throughout the
United Nations system.
Whereas mass atrocities appear in news headlines,
prevention does not. We warmly welcome the
appointment of Ms. Karen Smith as Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect,
as well as the appointment of Mr. Adama Dieng, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, as the focal point for the implementation
of the United Nations strategy and plan of action on
hate speech.
Effective prevention includes a set of tools
that interact in specific contexts. We must develop
a comprehensive and coherent alignment among
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
promoting peacekeeping operations and the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, protecting civilians and
promoting sustainable peace and human rights. Without
labelling them as preventive measures, States already
implement programmes and policies that address the
root causes of conflict and, as a result, atrocity crimes
are prevented. Reducing inequalities, combating

discrimination and promoting inclusive institutions
play an important role in ensuring that our societies
never have to face serious violations.
We must also support regional initiatives to
prevent atrocity crimes, including the strengthening
of partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. In that regard, the partnership among the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union, as well as links with subregional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States and the Latin American Network for Genocide
and Mass Atrocity Prevention, should be enhanced,
thereby promoting the exchange of good practices.
In the face of sharp challenges to multilateralism,
we must intensify our efforts to ensure that the United
Nations fulfils its purposes. It is insufficient to receive
early warnings of imminent crises if they are not
translated into responses.
Our responses to extreme human suffering have
been far from adequate. That is why, in 2014, our
Governments presented the Franco-Mexican initiative
to suspend the use of the veto in the Security Council
as a concrete way to operationalize the responsibility
to protect (R2P). We are convinced that the veto is
not a privilege but an international responsibility. Our
initiative seeks a voluntary and collective commitment
by the five permanent members of the Council not
to use the veto in cases of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes in order to enable the
Security Council to take effective action. At the
moment, the initiative is already supported by 101
States. We take this opportunity to urge all States that
have not yet done so, particularly the other permanent
members of the Security Council, to join the initiative.
In the face of mass atrocities, political agendas are
simply unjustifiable.
France and Mexico firmly believe that we should
make better use of existing mechanisms and institutions,
such as the Universal Periodic Review, to strengthen our
national preventive tools. The Human Rights Council
must work hand in hand with the Security Council
to transmit early warnings, enable timely action and
empower the peacebuilding architecture.
For some, R2P has become synonymous with
vigorous disagreements. To overcome them, it is fitting
that we hold an open discussion in the same General
Assembly, which gave rise to the concept. Another
opportunity to continue the discussions will arise at the

Legal Advisers meeting to take place during the Sixth
Committee’s International Law Week. Our priority
should be to operationalize the political commitments
that underpin the responsibility to protect. An open
dialogue such as this is an opportunity that should be
seized by all Member States.
Non-intervention does not mean indifference, and
neither is it a blank cheque for impunity. No amount
of Security Council action can replace the inherent
obligation of States to protect their populations. Our two
countries speak with one voice in this debate because we
are committed to a rules-based international order that
promotes stability and human rights. The loss of human
life is too high a cost to pay for a lack of consensus.
This is at the heart of our joint initiative — that full
respect for the Charter of the United Nations and full
respect for human life cannot be mutually exclusive.
Ms. Ioannou
the Chair.

(Cyprus),

Vice-President,

took

To avoid the repetition of mass atrocities, we must
ensure accountability for perpetrators of crimes and
justice for the victims. We continue to urge all States to
support and cooperate with missions and commissions
of inquiry dealing with mass atrocity crimes, as well as
with instruments of international criminal justice. In
that regard, we reiterate our call for all States to accede
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and to cooperate with the Court. The international
community must continue to prevent and combat sexual
and gender-based violence as a tactic of war.
We deliver this joint Mexican-French statement
today as an example of the cooperation that can exist
between permanent members of the Security Council
and all other Member States that recognize the value of
our common institutions. No responsibility is above the
responsibility to protect the peoples of our world. We
owe it to ourselves, our peoples and our United Nations
to live up to our responsibilities.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.
The five Nordic countries continue to be firmly
committed to the responsibility to protect (R2P). We
welcome the inclusion of R2P as a formal agenda item of
the General Assembly at its seventy-third session. This
marks the third time we held this important discussion

in a formal setting. We believe the General Assembly
should continue this practice of open and frank debate,
as repeatedly recommended by the Secretary-General.
As this is the first time that Ms. Karen Smith joins
us in the General Assembly as the Special Adviser on
R2P, we would like to extend her a special welcome. We
commend her work and that of the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Adama Dieng.
The prevention of atrocity crimes remains at the
core of the three pillars of the responsibility to protect.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s approach to
make the responsibility to protect an important part
of his broader strategy to prioritize prevention across
all pillars of the Organization’s work. We believe that
mediation and increasing mediation capacity at the
local, regional and international levels, as well as at
the United Nations, is an important part of working
towards more effective conflict prevention.
It is also crucial to continue linking R2P to other
related agendas, including peacekeeping, the protection
of civilians, women and peace and security, sustaining
peace and the Sustainable Development Goals.
With regard to the prevention of atrocity crimes, we
emphasize the role of women and youth, as they are
crucial for early warning and peacebuilding, as well as
the creation of more inclusive societies. We should take
concrete steps to end all forms of discrimination on the
basis of gender and to empower women, including by
ensuring that all girls can go to school.
The growing number of attacks against civilians,
hospitals, schools and humanitarian workers is
unacceptable. The Nordic countries call on all
Member States to uphold all their obligations under
international law, including international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
refugee law, at a time when a divided Security Council
is unable to take needed action in many serious
conflict situations.
While the Security Council is not able to act in
many situations relating to international accountability,
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council
play an important role in responding to atrocity crimes.
That was demonstrated by the establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 and the independent

investigative mechanism for Myanmar. Those successes
are the direct result of the concerted efforts of Member
States committed to holding perpetrators accountable
for their actions. Ensuring accountability remains one
of the most effective ways to prevent the recurrence of
mass atrocity crimes.
We recall that States have the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute international
crimes committed within their jurisdictions. National
accountability efforts should be encouraged and
supported. The Nordic Governments also strongly
support the International Criminal Court (ICC) as
the most important institutional development in the
battle to end impunity for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. It is well justified to discuss
the role of the ICC during this meeting as well, since
support for the activities of the ICC may also have a
deterrent effect.
Upholding our collective responsibility to protect
must remain at the centre of our commitment to an
international rules-based order. The multilateral
system we have all worked so hard to create deserves
our unwavering support and respect. We must urgently
increase the speed at which we move towards a
prevention-centred analysis and a culture of earlier
preventive action when signs of atrocity crimes are
identified. There are no excuses for inaction.
Ms. Kabua (Marshal Islands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the 12 members of the Pacific small
island developing States. I align this statement with
the statement to be delivered on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum.
I would like to thank the President for this
opportunity to address Member States. We acknowledge
the inclusion of this important topic in the formal agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session.

suffered either directly or indirectly from deliberate
and indiscriminate attacks, experienced the loss of
livelihoods, been forced to flee their homes, suffered
sexual abuse, or been denied access to humanitarian aid
and proper medical care.
The United Nations remains the most uniquely
placed multilateral organization for establishing
norms and assisting in and enforcing the protection
of civilians. The outcome of the 2005 World Summit
on the responsibility to protect (R2P) empowers the
United Nations to play that leading role on R2P. Earlier
this year, in his address to the Security Council at the
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflicts,
the Secretary-General highlighted that “while
the normative framework has been strengthened,
compliance has deteriorated” (S/PV.8534, p. 2). The
Secretary-General’s report in June on the responsibility
to protect highlights that gaps continue to exist between
our stated commitment and the reality on the ground
(A/73/898). We therefore urge action to address those
gaps. Respect for international conventions, awareness
and accountability should be the foundation of R2P.
We acknowledge the link between the Human
Rights Council and the Security Council and
encourage the further strengthening of such links.
Our institutions and mechanisms based in Geneva
can play an important role in preventing mass atrocity
crimes. We are encouraged that one of our own from
the region currently sits on the Human Rights Council,
thereby demonstrating the importance we place on such
bodies. The unique experiences and challenges within
our Pacific Islands region provide us with a heightened
sensitivity towards ensuring that the voices of the most
vulnerable are not overlooked.

The protection of people all over the world
irrespective of creed, ethnicity and affiliation is at the
heart of the United Nations and amply embodied in the
Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations — We the
Peoples. Earlier this year, a ceremony was held in this
very Hall to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. It
was a stark reminder of what happens when we, as the
international community, fail to act.

The Pacific has in place a number of regional
security cooperation arrangements, the most recent
being the Boe Declaration, which was adopted by our
Pacific leaders in Nauru in September 2018. The Boe
Declaration recognizes that prevention and collective
action is critical for the protection of our peoples. The
Boe Declaration goes even further in recognizing
the multidimensional nature of security, cutting
across a number of areas, including the environment.
The existence of our regional security cooperation
arrangements is a testament to our commitment as
a region.

As we meet today, there are still many around
the world suffering as a result of conflicts. They have

Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of Estonia, Lithuania and my own

country, Latvia. We align ourselves with the statement
made by the Head of Delegation of the European Union.
We welcome this annual General Assembly
debate on the responsibility to protect (R2P). The
implementation of the responsibility to protect should
be a standing item on the General Assembly agenda,
as it provides an opportunity to take stock and hold
a dialogue among the States Members of the United
Nations on the topic.
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have supported
the principle of the responsibility to protect since its
adoption at the 2005 World Summit, and we reaffirm
our commitment today. Protecting populations from
acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity must be a global priority.
However, the responsibility to protect should not be
perceived as an international issue alone. Sovereignty
entails responsibility; it is the primary responsibility of
individual States to protect all populations within their
territory from atrocity crimes.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report on the responsibility to protect, which focuses
on lessons learned for prevention (A/73/898). The
Baltic States — staunch supporters of international
law, democracy and human rights — fully support the
Secretary-General for placing the issue of prevention at
the centre of the United Nations agenda. Regrettably,
the report reaffirms the negative trends in the
implementation of the responsibility — the growing
gap between our words of commitment and actual
protection of populations against atrocities.
We are extremely concerned about deliberate
attacks against civilians, civilian infrastructure,
journalists, humanitarian and medical personnel and
infrastructure during armed conflict. The illegal
proliferation of arms and weapons, easily accessible
to atrocity perpetrators, also has a negative impact on
the protection of civilians. We continue to advocate the
protection of populations against atrocities and express
our deep concern at attempts to downgrade atrocities
committed by former totalitarian regimes — memories
that are still alive in our countries.
We, as individual Member States and as the
international community, must do our utmost to translate
our words of commitment into practice and to improve
the effectiveness of atrocity-crimes prevention. Greater
focus and energy should be put into prevention rather
than response, before atrocities are carried out. Once

the point of acute violence has been reached, options to
respond to crises are quite limited. The political will to
act swiftly is essential.
Despite certain setbacks, we recognize the
progress achieved in operationalizing the R2P concept,
which can save lives. We note the successful measures
taken to strengthen resilience to atrocity crimes at
the national and regional levels. The report of the
Secretary-General, as with all 10 previous reports on
the responsibility to protect, provides useful practical
policy recommendations based on best practices and
lessons learned from past situations.
With the help of available prevention tools
we must better translate early-warning signs into
timely preventive action to avoid repeating the tragic
mistakes of the past. That can be done by developing
and integrating early warning in national policies
and by addressing the root causes of risks, with, inter
alia, education, training and building resilience to
atrocity crimes.
For us, human rights, good governance and the rule
of law are central to prevention. With strong national
institutions, transparent and accountable political
leadership and respect for the rule of law, efforts to
prevent atrocity crimes can be more effective. Atrocity
prevention is deeply linked to the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, including Goal 16, on
the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies.
The protection of human rights is imperative to
the prevention of conflicts. Furthermore, systematic
human rights violations are often important warning
signs of political crises. Regional and international
human rights mechanisms and their recommendations,
as well as the Human Rights Council, can provide
useful support and guidance to Member States. In
addition, civil society, media and journalists positively
contribute to developing early-warning and response
systems by raising public awareness about human
rights violations and crimes against humanity.
We appreciate the ongoing efforts to improve the
system-wide capacity of the United Nations to prevent
and respond to serious and systematic violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. In
that regard, we are pleased that the Secretary-General
remains committed to the Human Rights Up Front
initiative, which can help ring the alarm bell before
abuses escalate into atrocity crimes.

We welcome the recent appointment of Ms. Karen
Smith as the new Special Adviser on R2P. We wish her
success in advancing the R2P agenda across the United
Nations system and with Member States. We also
appreciate the dedicated work of the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng.
The early action and response of the United Nations
is critical to R2P implementation. Operationalizing
the R2P concept through the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations is among the most direct
ways by which organizations can prevent atrocity
crimes. We applaud the innovative ways of the United
Nations political and technical support to civil society
organizations in enhancing prevention efforts at the
grass-roots level.
The Security Council, which has a special
responsibility to take timely and decisive action
in situations of imminent risk of atrocity crimes,
should use all available tools to prevent such crimes,
including United Nations early-warning capacities and
mechanisms. In order to ensure a more effective Security
Council response to the outbreak of brutality against
innocent people, we strongly support both mutually
reinforcing initiatives — the French-Mexican proposal
to voluntarily limit the use of the veto at the Security
Council in situations involving mass atrocity crimes
and the code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes. We are encouraged by the major support
for those important initiatives.
Finally, we wish to express our deep concern about
impunity for mass atrocity crimes. Accountability must
be ensured through thorough national investigations
and prosecutions of persons responsible for the most
serious crimes. Furthermore, independent international
accountability mechanisms, including the International
Criminal Court, and better judicial cooperation
between States and the Court are essential elements
in delivering justice. We concur with the SecretaryGeneral that atrocity crimes are preventable. Swift and
concerted action for the responsibility to protect is the
answer to how we can do so. We call on all Member
States to uphold that important political commitment
and stand against inaction and impunity regarding
mass atrocity crimes.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia was proud to partner
with Ghana to propose last year’s important debate
on the responsibility to protect (R2P), the first in the

General Assembly for a decade. More than 100 States
from every region participated. Support for the R2P
principle and its implementation was overwhelming, as
was the desire for ongoing dialogue in the Assembly
on how we can better protect populations from mass
atrocities. Such a response was fitting. After all, when
our leaders agreed the R2P principle, in 2005, they
envisaged a leading role for the Assembly. We also
appreciated the opportunity to hear those who have
questions or harbour misgivings. Let me reaffirm
that the R2P principle is not a stalking horse for other
agendas or an attempt to reinterpret the Charter of
the United Nations. It is about reinforcing the need to
work collectively in line with the Charter to protect
populations from mass atrocities.
Australia agrees with the Secretary-General that
regional organizations are essential to operationalizing
R2P. Pacific Islands Forum leaders — via the declarations
made in Biketawa in 2000 and Boe in 2018 — have long
recognized our collective vulnerability and the need to
address such challenges at the regional level, as the
Permanent Representative of the Marshall Islands just
reminded us.
The Biketawa Declaration served as the foundation
for regional assistance efforts, including a successful
mission to Solomon Islands — the Regional Assistance
Mission to the Solomon Islands — which ended in 2017,
a meaningful example of pillar 2 in action. The 2018
Boe Declaration reaffirms the critical importance of
a rules-based international order, with the Charter at
its heart. It commits to strengthening regional security
and stability, including by identifying and addressing
emerging security challenges and improving earlywarning mechanisms.
Regional organizations can learn much from each
other in their respective atrocity prevention efforts.
That is why Australia supports innovative regional
initiatives such as the Asia Pacific Partnership for
Atrocity Prevention. Australia will host the first
regional meeting of Asia-Pacific R2P focal points later
this year. Such collaboration is bolstered by global
forums such the Global Network of R2P Focal Points,
in which Australia is active. With 61 focal points, the
Network shares ideas and policies and builds capacity
for implementing R2P.
Australia thanks the Secretary-General’s Chef
de Cabinet for the insightful remarks today and for
this year’s report of the Secretary-General on R2P

(A/73/898). We pay tribute to the efforts of the Special
Advisers for the Prevention of Genocide and R2P,
Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Karen Smith. We agree that
the United Nations principal organs and its Member
States have a critical role in implementing R2P. But it
is important also to evaluate the role of the Secretariat.
Recent independent reviews have highlighted the
critical importance of United Nations officials speaking
for the Organization as a whole in situations of mass
atrocities. It is also essential that the Secretariat ensure
that reporting from the field provides an accurate and
complete picture of developments on the ground. In
that regard, we wholeheartedly support the SecretaryGeneral’s ongoing reform agenda.
The Charter endows the Security Council with
unique powers. With such powers comes special
responsibilities. That is why we joined 118 others
to support the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group’s code of conduct, which is a
commitment to refrain from vetoing Security Council
action in cases of mass atrocities. We also encourage all
States, but especially current and prospective Security
Council members, to join Australia and 100 other
States in supporting the France-Mexico initiative on
veto restraint. In instances where a permanent member
blocks Council action in cases of mass atrocities or
atrocity risk, we believe that we should explore possible
ways to use the Assembly for further dialogue.
Mr. Guillermet-Fernandez (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour to stand at this rostrum under
the presidency of Her Excellency Ms. María Fernanda
Espinosa Garcés.
My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect (R2P).
Allow me, first of all, to thank the President of
the General Assembly for convening this important
meeting. Costa Rica was pleased to see the responsibility
to protect included on the agenda of the General
Assembly at its previous sessions, thereby giving us
repeated opportunities to discuss this issue. This is
especially pertinent given the turbulent times we are
currently experiencing at the global level, with millions
of people being displaced due to violence, persecution
and oppression.

We bear witness to terrible crimes on a daily basis:
sexual violence and hunger are used as weapons of war,
specific ethnic groups are the targets of genocide and
children do not have access to education or the most basic
services because their schools and medical centres have
been unscrupulously destroyed. My country reiterates
its legal, political and, above all moral commitment
to achieving the full implementation of this principle
and its three pillars outlined in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, so as to increase the capacity of
the Organization and States in matters of prevention,
early warning and effective and rapid response.
In exercising their sovereignty, States have the
primary obligation to protect their populations. For
that reason, it is necessary to establish comprehensive
measures by designing policies that foster equitable
and inclusive societies that promote non-discrimination
and the empowerment of women, where hate speech is
condemned and tolerance is encouraged. That is how
strategies should be developed — in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development — in order to
promote the integral development of our populations
while avoiding factors that lead to conflict, such as
exclusion and discrimination.
It is also essential to strengthen institutions, the
rule of law, access to justice and existing capacities.
In that regard, it is crucial that the assistance provided
by States and regional and international organizations,
as well as civil society organizations, be adapted to fit
national priorities and reflect society as a whole, taking
into account the existing structures on a case-bycase basis.
Likewise, in order to prevent the reoccurrence
of atrocities, it is imperative to deal with postconflict national conciliation processes through
transitional justice, the preservation of memory and the
reconstruction of social peace. It is therefore necessary
to put an end to impunity and bring those responsible
to justice, while refraining from granting immunity
and amnesty to the perpetrators of such crimes. My
country strongly advocates that eliminating impunity
and ensuring accountability are just as important as
preventive measures themselves.
In the same vein, Costa Rica reiterates its full
support for the International Criminal Court. We call
on those States that have not yet done so to join the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and its amendments, and call on those of us who are

States parties to comply with the Court’s decisions in
accordance with our international obligations.
Similarly, we believe that collective international
action to prevent mass atrocities must be based on
impartial information collected in such a way that
ensures it is not subject to political pressure. For that
reason, Costa Rica supports initiatives such as the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as the Human
Rights Up Front initiative.
The principle of the responsibility to protect was
conceptualized in line with States’ obligations — under
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law — to not commit systematic human
rights violations against the civilian population. Those
obligations must therefore be incorporated into the
internal legal frameworks of States. Likewise, in order
to strengthen internal early-warning mechanisms and
others for the prevention of atrocities, coordination
between the principal organs of the United Nations and
the mechanisms established under resolutions of the
Security Council must be strengthened.
It is of concern to note that, as a consequence
of political divisions and geopolitical interests, the
principal organs of the United Nations have failed to
take the necessary and effective actions to prevent
or halt attacks against the civilian population. In that
regard, the members of the Security Council, whether
permanent or elected, must honour the Charter of the
United Nations and comply with its mandate to ensure
prompt and effective action, in line with its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. We therefore call on the members of the Security
Council to support the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group code of conduct against genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We also urge
the permanent members to refrain from using the veto
in such cases, in line with the code of conduct.
We also reaffirm the decisive and relevant role that
the Human Rights Council, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
treaty bodies must play in those aspects. We support
the development of initiatives such as the Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, which aim to tackle risk
factors and protect populations. Similarly, we highlight

the efforts undertaken by the Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to
Protect and express our strong support for their work.
My country considers prevention and early action
to be the most effective ways of protecting vulnerable
populations and, in line with that position, we are
making various efforts to that end. They include the
holding of a workshop in May, in collaboration with the
Auschwitz Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, on
strategies against discrimination based on an approach
geared towards the prevention of mass atrocities and
focused on lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex persons. Its aim was to provide theoretical
tools and prevention practices aimed at State police and
security forces, as well as prison authorities.
Costa Rica is also an active participant in
several initiatives with the aim of furthering the
implementation of the responsibility to protect, such as
the Latin American Network for Genocide and Mass
Atrocity Prevention, and Global Action against Mass
Atrocity Crimes. And, together with Denmark, Ghana
and Australia, we are part of the Global Network of
R2P Focal Points. Costa Rica welcomes the fact that,
to date, 61 members — in addition to the European
Union and the Organization of American States — have
appointed a focal point for the responsibility to protect,
thereby strengthening their preventive capacities. We
urge those States that have not yet done so to nominate
their focal point and join the Global Network. At its
latest meeting, the Global Network called to integrate
the implementation of R2P within the prevention
agendas in both New York and Geneva. My country
fully supports that.
I would like to thank the President once again for
having convened this important debate, which we hope
will help to encourage a more in-depth reflection on
this topic, as well as inspire greater progress and the
strengthening of the implementation of this principle.
This is all the more relevant at a time when the
implementation of the responsibility to protect and
the multilateral commitments that accompany it are
becoming increasingly necessary.
Mr. Leal Matta (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this plenary meeting so that
we can address an issue to which Guatemala attaches
great importance, that is, the responsibility to protect.
This meeting is taking place against a controversial
international backdrop, which makes it necessary to

return to the standard of international security and
human rights conceived at the 2005 World Summit,
with the aim of preventing the most atrocious war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
We take note of the report (A/73/898) of the
Secretary-General entitled “The responsibility to
protect: lessons learned for prevention”. We would
also like to make several additional remarks in
that connection.
The General Assembly has recognized that every
State, as a society organized on the basis of laws, bears
the primary responsibility for protecting its population
and preventing atrocities such as those we have seen
in the past. That underscores the genesis and the
relevance of the responsibility to protect in terms of its
implementation today. It is a principle that is rooted in
the fundamental purpose of the Charter of the United
Nations, which is to prevent the scourge of war and to
promote peace among peoples and nations.
We would like to express our appreciation of the
fact that the responsibility to protect is on this session’s
General Assembly agenda. That demonstrates the
membership’s broad interest in the issue being discussed
in this forum. We therefore believe that the inclusion
of this item on the agenda of the General Assembly
shows the appropriateness of the forum to discuss
its implementation as an exemplary mechanism for
protecting populations from barbarity and guaranteeing
them the enjoyment of their human rights.
From our national perspective, the responsibility
to protect is a norm that corresponds with our
constitutional principles, since the State of Guatemala
was established to protect individuals and families and
its ultimate goal is achieving the common good.
Seventy-one years after the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the responsibility to
protect must be recognized as the exemplary way
to protect populations from mass atrocities. It must
therefore be strengthened, particularly given the new
hotbeds of tension in which similar trends prevail, in
the worst cases leading to new crimes against humanity
and cases of ethnic cleansing. My delegation is proud
to be part of the code of conduct initiative to prevent
the use of the veto in the Security Council in cases of
genocide and crimes against humanity, and we urge
other States to join it.

We therefore reiterate our call to uphold international
obligations under international human rights law,
international law and refugee law, since protecting
the civilian population is intrinsically linked to them.
In that context, in order to support the protection of
civilians, Guatemala is honoured to be a country that
contributes to United Nations peacekeeping.
Guatemala recognizes that the principle of the
responsibility to protect is complemented by the
concept of sustainable peace, since it prioritizes
respect for and observance of human rights, based on
a preventive approach in order to avoid confrontations.
We welcome the concerted efforts of the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
and its vital work in such a significant area. In that vein,
my delegation highlights the individual and collective
capacities to prevent mass atrocities, which are
enhanced by the Global Network of the Responsibility
to Protect Focal Points.
In conclusion, as a promoter of the responsibility
to protect, Guatemala reaffirms its commitment to the
principle and urges that we step up our efforts towards
its full implementation.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): Slovenia strongly
welcomes today’s General Assembly formal debate
on the responsibility to protect (R2P). We would like
to thank the Secretary-General for this year’s report,
entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons learned for
prevention” (A/73/898). We once again welcome the
inclusion of R2P and the prevention of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
on the formal agenda of the General Assembly at
its seventy-third session and express our support
for its inclusion as a standing agenda item of the
General Assembly.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU)
and by the representative of Denmark on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
No matter how many times we reiterate that the
failure to protect human beings from mass atrocities
and systemic violations of human rights should not be
repeated, we still witness events that shock our human
conscience time and again. It is important that today’s
dialogue is taking place and that the dialogue should
continue on a regular basis. The different views, many
of which we will hear in the Hall today, must not inhibit
our joint determination and commitment to protecting

populations from atrocity crimes in the future. It
is important that we also scale up our efforts at the
national and regional levels.
We fully support the use of preventive diplomacy
and we call for prevention and a better response to
large-scale violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Slovenia believes that prevention
remains the key to protecting populations from
situations that may lead to mass atrocity crimes.
At the national level, we are therefore organizing
awareness-raising events on R2P, using the United
Nations Framework of Analysis for Atrocity
Crimes, which we have translated into the Slovenian
language. For a number of years Slovenia has also
been organizing biannual regional R2P focal point
meetings and academic conferences on R2P. Following
the 2013, 2015 and 2017 events, Slovenia hosted the
fourth academic conference entitled “Responsibility to
Protect in Theory and Practice” in May. We would like
to especially thank Special Adviser Ms. Karen Smith
for her contribution at the conference.
The Slovenian R2P focal point joined the steering
group for R2P in 2019 with the objective of mobilizing
the effective implementation of R2P through the Global
Network of the Responsibility to Protect Focal Points.
Let me use this opportunity to reiterate the call to all
Member States and partners that have not yet appointed
their national R2P focal point to do so.
At the regional level, we support the EU-level
activities and, in that respect, we are especially proud
of the document entitled “Recommendations on
promoting and operationalizing the Responsibility to
Protect by the EU and EU member States” and the EU
R2P Mass Atrocity Prevention Toolkit. We are also
very pleased that other regional organizations were
invited to the Meeting of the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points held in Brussels in May.
We believe that the Security Council can have a
decisive role in preventing and addressing situations
of mass atrocity. Slovenia supports the idea of better
utilizing the Security Council to more efficiently
address human rights violations as threats and early
indicators of atrocity crimes. We encourage the Council
to invite Special Advisers to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect and other experts on a regular basis for
briefings, especially regarding early warning.

Geneva-based institutions such as the Human
Rights Council and its mechanisms, for example, the
Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
mandate holders, can play an important role in
increasing early awareness and early-action efforts.
Regular Security Council briefings by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as by chairs
of fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry,
can further strengthen the necessary cooperation to
prevent mass atrocities.
In order to improve the international community’s
ability to take timely and decisive early action, we
strongly support the code of conduct developed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
and the French-Mexican initiative, which calls on
the permanent members of the Security Council to
voluntarily refrain from using the veto in situations of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Slovenia wishes to reiterate that no effort should
be spared to systematically invest in the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Ensuring accountability for atrocity
crimes and other serious abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law is and remains
an important aspect of preventing the recurrence
of conflict.
But ensuring accountability remains a major
challenge. In this regard, the role of international
criminal justice has been recognized, in particular
the role of the International Criminal Court. We
continue to express our firm support for the work of the
International Criminal Court as well as of regional and
State mechanisms to counter impunity.
The Rome Statute offers an important legal
framework for national legal systems and acts as
a deterrent to the most heinous crimes. Individual
criminal accountability is a crucial element for breaking
the vicious circle of impunity. Slovenia will continue to
advocate for the universality of the Rome Statute.
In a broader framework, Slovenia believes that
numerous activities, including efforts to ensure the full
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and preventive measures such as the
World Programme for Human Rights Education, can
contribute to atrocity prevention and respect for human
rights and the rule of law. Here let me reaffirm our
support for the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up
Front initiative.

It is up to us, the Member States, to get prevention
right, to be aware of and recognize early-warning
signs such as human rights violations, and to respond
appropriately. We hold the primary responsibility to
protect our populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Once again, let me reaffirm Slovenia’s support for
the United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and
the Responsibility to Protect and the committed work
of Special Advisers Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Karen
Smith to mainstream the responsibility to protect
within the United Nations system. We also thank the
Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect for its
efforts and support in the area of awareness-raising.
As we will be celebrating the fifteenth anniversary
of R2P next year and taking stock of the efforts made to
implement it, we would welcome a General Assembly
resolution in this respect.
Let me conclude by stating Slovenia’s strong
commitment to remain an advocate of R2P and of the
wider promotion and protection of human rights.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
At the outset, Italy would like to express its
gratitude for the advocacy on the responsibility to
protect (R2P) that the Secretary-General continues to
provide, including through his annual reports.

and Mexican declaration on refraining voluntarily from
the use of the veto. We support the Secretary-General’s
2019 report on the responsibility to protect (A/73/898).
Prevention and early action are of the essence. We
need to implement this principle by strengthening the
rule of law and ensuring accountability for past atrocity
crimes, supporting the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDG 16, but
also by securing proper livelihoods, as economic risk is
one of the main triggers for atrocity crimes.
Addressing the root causes of such crimes is a big
part of the solution. That is why we see great merit
in a cross-cutting strategy linking the various United
Nations agendas, from the protection of civilians
to women and peace and security, from sustainable
development to the wider human rights agenda
and peacekeeping.
Prevention is also about detecting the early signs
of potential disruption. Atrocity crimes do not happen
overnight, as the Special Envoy correctly pointed out;
they are carefully prepared and organized. Hate speech
plays a big role in the build-up to atrocity crimes. We
therefore commend the leadership of Under-SecretaryGeneral Adama Dieng in the elaboration of the
United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech, which is a much-needed and timely step in the
right direction.

I would also like to congratulate the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect, Karen Smith, for her
active leadership, and to thank the Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, for his
tireless efforts.

We need to strengthen civil society and recognize
the paramount role of women in building pluralistic,
inclusive societies that provide the best protection
against mass atrocities. Protecting women is a categorical
imperative, especially when sexual and gender-based
violence are increasingly used as a deliberate political
strategy by State and non-State perpetrators.

We welcomed the inclusion of the responsibility to
protect in the formal agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session, and we support its inclusion
as a standing item in the Assembly’s agenda.

We are all called upon to step up our efforts to
defend human rights and uphold our responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

The principle of a shared responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes
against humanity and war crimes should continue
to inspire our action today, when we are facing a
general erosion of respect for international law. The
Security Council has a clear responsibility in this
respect. We support the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group’s code of conduct and the French

Italy continues to do its part: we have consistently
been a strong supporter of R2P in the Security Council
and as a former Chair of the Group of Friends on
the Responsibility to Protect, and we remain fully
committed at this time of escalating international
tensions. As the top Western troop-contributing
country for peacekeeping operations, we believe that
the effective protection of civilians requires properly

trained troops, adequate equipment and a strong
political commitment.
Since 2005, through the Center of Excellence for
Stability Police Units in Vicenza, we have trained more
than 10,000 police personnel units, many of which have
deployed in peacekeeping operations in Africa.
We joined the Circle of Leadership on the
Prevention of and Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse in United Nations Operations launched by the
Secretary-General, and we are the largest contributor to
the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Victims of
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. We have appointed an
R2P national focal point, and we encourage all Member
States and regional organizations to do the same.
Finally, at the end of May, Italy hosted a conference
in Rome on SDG 16 in preparation for the upcoming
High-level Political Forum, and we were pleased
to welcome the Special Envoy, who stressed the
fundamental link between SDG 16 and R2P.
Italy will continue to work in this direction and will
continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to
ensure that our founding values remain at the basis of
our societies.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Pakistan’s delegation thanks
you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting of the General Assembly on the responsibility
to protect (R2P) and the prevention of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
But the responsibility to protect as a principle
evokes differing responses. We feel that maintaining
the fragile consensus on the issue is critical. Any
reinterpretation of this understanding or initiatives
lacking broad support are counterproductive and
should be avoided. That is why we have been concerned
at the way this process has developed since we met in
what was characterized as a “one-off” plenary meeting
in June 2018. Our focus should be on bridging the
substantive gaps between respective positions rather
than on specific modalities to hold these discussions.
Paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document provide the cornerstone
of our collective commitment to prevent genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
That responsibility to protect is in essence a political
expression of what is already an obligation for States,
as their sovereign responsibility to their citizens.
While some have attempted to project this re-iteration

of the existing provisions of international law into
a new legal instrument, we believe that is misplaced
and unwarranted.
For if there is one lesson to be readily drawn from
the depressing litany of failures of the international
community in recent years, it is not the lack of legal
means to prevent egregious crimes, but instead the lack
of political will to do so. Despite enthusiastic espousal
by its proponents, there is scant little to suggest that the
notion of the responsibility to protect has catalysed into
an abiding change in the disposition of Member States.
In fact, as decisions by the international community
continue to betray the high standards of objectivity and
impartiality, the already fledgling edifice of R2P has
become more tenuous.
If we are indeed to stem that tide, what is needed
is to summon our collective resolve and our collective
will and to act in a consistent and uniform manner
towards all transgressions. Otherwise, the purity of
motive notwithstanding, the resultant actions will
continue to lack the legal and moral legitimacy to gain
wider acceptability.
If the notion of the responsibility to protect is indeed
to become the voice of conscience of the international
community, we must all play our part. Foremost in
that regard, we should not allow human suffering to
be selectively prioritized for political convenience, or
to serve narrow interests. There cannot be any moral
ambivalence on this issue. Therefore, as much as we
express our deep concern at the plight of people caught
up in conflict, we cannot become oblivious to the wellbeing of those who have been forced to flee their homes
and seek protection and shelter elsewhere. They cannot
be left to the mercy of the elements, or contained beyond
high walls of exclusion or separation.
Similarly, our declarations on human rights will
remain unfulfilled without highlighting the systematic
and gross violations of fundamental human rights,
in particular in occupied territories, which relate
to issues that are the subject of repeated Security
Council resolutions.
As we approach the landmark seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, my delegation
considers that the best measure of our commitment to
the vulnerable is to recommit ourselves to the abiding
values of the Charter of the United Nations, which we
commemorated yesterday in such an elegant ceremony,
based on the inherent dignity and worth of the individual

and the provision of fundamental human rights,
including the right of peoples to self-determination.
Secondly, the Charter’s vision of achieving a
life of dignity for all is postulated on international
cooperation and the harmonization of policies within
the United Nations. That objective can be best served
by operationalizing the principle of the right to
development, which encompasses the right to food,
shelter, fair terms of trade, debt relief and adequate
access to financing and technology. After all, in a world
beset by socioeconomic inequalities, many situations
that lead to turmoil and conflict are the result of
deprivation, underdevelopment and poverty.
Thirdly, a prevention-centric focus must be
prioritized as the cornerstone of any protection-oriented
approach, for it costs far more to pick up the pieces after
a crisis than it does to prevent one. We have taken note
of the useful lessons learned for prevention drawn by
the Secretary-General in his latest report (A/73/898).
Of particular significance is the insidious role played by
hate speech as incitement to violence, including atrocity
crimes. Islamophobia has become the most prevalent
contemporary expression of this vile narrative. We
know only too well from our neighbourhood how the
abiding lure of communal politics has become the most
assured pathway to power. We must make concerted
efforts to reverse the tide of hate and bigotry that
threatens to undermine social cohesion and peaceful
coexistence within societies.
At its core, the responsibility to protect is not
a license to intervene in external situations, but is
instead a universal principle of non-indifference in
keeping with the historical contexts and cultural norms
of respective settings. It is predicated upon the express
recognition that the responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies first and foremost with Member States.
Set against the overarching principle of State
sovereignty, the responsibility to protect cannot become
a basis to contravene the principles of non-interference
and non-intervention, or question the national
sovereignty or territorial integrity of States. That
remains the sole point of departure for our discussion
on the responsibility to protect.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union and with the statement
delivered by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/73/898). We agree with his
approach, which is focused on prevention and on
national measures aimed at addressing the risk of
atrocity crimes.
Spain is in favour of making today’s debate part
of the agenda of the General Assembly on a regular
basis every year. No society is immune to the risk of
atrocity crimes. That is why no society should lower
its guard. We are concerned about the increase in
extremist political positions in many parts of the world,
including in Europe, the region to which we belong.
Those are positions that are strengthened and fuelled by
xenophobic and racist discourse — fallacious denials of
the equality of all people and of the humanity in each
of us. Given that phenomenon, we must vigorously
and persistently defend the dignity and equality of
all individuals. With that concern in mind, we again
warmly welcome the United Nations Strategy and Plan
of Action on Hate Speech, which was presented on
18 June.
Spain believes that the responsibility to protect
should have an approach that respects human rights
and international humanitarian law, above all through
concerted action by the international community.
Valuable examples of that, in our opinion, are the
Global Compact on Refugees and the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, both of which
offer a framework for cooperative and valid action that
is beneficial because of its preventive potential.
Prevention is always more effective when it is part
of a joint, multidisciplinary and cross-cutting approach
that favours the synergy of different agendas. That
conviction informs our commitment to bringing the
responsibility to protect to the women and peace and
security agenda, in line with what has already been
included in the report of the Secretary-General. In
our view, it is also necessary for that synergy to lead
to a systematic consideration of the responsibility to
protect in the work of the Security Council and in the
monitoring of specific situations.
In that connection, we welcome the joint statement
on attacks against civilians in central Mali issued by the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the
Responsibility to Protect and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. Spain is therefore in favour of those Special
Advisers and Special Representatives being heard

when the Security Council discusses measures to be
taken in situations of this nature, including in closeddoor consultations.
Atrocity crimes cannot go unpunished, and those
responsible must be brought to justice. There is no doubt
that each State has the responsibility and competence to
investigate and prosecute atrocity crimes. But let us not
forget that international cooperation among States in
that regard often facilitates, and sometimes even makes
it possible, for States to exercise that responsibility
and competence. However, that does not obviate the
existence of, and support for, the International Criminal
Court and complementary mechanisms and measures,
such as the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission. Spain firmly believes that mechanisms
for investigating and verifying facts have an invaluable
preventive role. In addition, those mechanisms
perfectly match the subsequent demand for criminal
responsibility for the gravest violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that, in
our opinion, this is not merely a conceptual debate
about procedure or competence. States always have
the responsibility to protect their populations and
have no justification for dodging that responsibility
or exonerating those responsible. It is a responsibility
that must be enforced by all means at our disposal, and
does not affect the need to further explore preventive
measures under the three equal, complementary and
non-sequential pillars of the responsibility to protect.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Karen Smith on her appointment
as the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
as well as to voice my appreciation for the work done
by her predecessors. I also take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his third report on the
responsibility to protect (A/73/898), which adequately
focuses on lessons learned and prevention. Those two
interrelated elements are instrumental for the future
implementation of the responsibility to protect (R2P).
The lessons learned from past experiences confirm
that prevention should always be our primary focus in
protecting populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing.
In the 2005 World Summit Outcome document,
Member States stressed the need for the General
Assembly to continue its consideration of the
responsibility to protect. Yet, in the almost 15 years

since then, this is only the third formal debate held
by the Assembly on the matter. Brazil welcomes the
inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda and expresses
its support for the formal discussion of this topic
in future General Assembly sessions. As the most
democratic organ of the United Nations, the Assembly
should assert ownership and shape the debate on the
protection of the world’s populations from the most
serious crimes of international concern. The emphasis
on prevention reinforces the key role that the General
Assembly plays in R2P debates, given that many United
Nations initiatives with preventive effects take place in
this forum.
Besides looking at the past, the most recent report
of the Secretary-General also invites Member States to
look inward. That is wise and often forgotten advice,
grounded in the origins of R2P, the essence of which is
precisely each State’s responsibility to protect its own
population. As the report accurately points out, viewing
R2P as an exclusively international issue reinforces the
erroneous notion that it is primarily about international
responses to domestic crises. On the contrary, for
R2P to overcome criticism, its implementation should
not focus on the exceptional and sporadic imposition
of coercive measures, but rather on the ongoing
development of structural policies that contribute to
more peaceful, inclusive and tolerant societies. Such
policies include actions on human rights education,
the promotion of a culture of peace and tolerance,
measures against xenophobia and racial discrimination,
reparation programmes for victims of serious human
rights violations and the promotion and protection of
the human rights of the most vulnerable segments of
the population.
The second part of the report addresses the role
of the international community. Brazil welcomes
the initial emphasis on long-term and structural
prevention, in line with an approach that tackles the
root causes of R2P crimes. Nevertheless, we would
have preferred it if the report had drawn a clear
dividing line between prevention and response, so as
to avoid conflating pillar II, related to prevention, with
pillar III, related to response. While the former refers
to international cooperation to build the capacity of
States to protect their populations from R2P crimes, the
latter encompasses potential responses to the manifest
failures of national authorities to attain that objective.
It is only when preventive measures fall short that
response action comes into play.

When response action is deemed necessary, there is
a range of non-coercive measures that can help prevent
R2P crimes, including mediation, negotiation, counternarratives to incitement to violence and actions to reduce
the vulnerability of civilian populations. In the worst
case scenario, if coercive measures are considered and
duly authorized in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, their implementation must be judicious,
proportionate and strictly limited to the objectives of
the mandate. Moreover, Security Council resolutions
that authorize military action should include sunset
clauses, demand adequate reporting and provide for the
monitoring of its implementation.
Brazil considers that R2P is, first and foremost,
about implementing existing provisions of international
law. In that regard, as we have flagged in previous
speeches, it is important to avoid the temptation of
proliferating imprecise concepts. The oft-used term
“atrocity crimes” is not defined in international law
or in multilateral resolutions or decisions. The four
crimes mentioned in the 2005 Outcome document are
undoubtedly atrocity crimes but so are others that are
not included under R2P, such as aggression. Moreover,
despite generally being dealt with as a homogenous
group, each kind of crime may derive from different
factors and therefore require distinctive strategies for
prevention. However, one common trait is the frequent
correlation between R2P crimes and armed conflicts,
which reinforces the argument with regard to the
atrocious nature of the crime of aggression and recalls
the importance of conflict prevention.
In conclusion, as the Secretary-General correctly
highlights in his report, R2P crimes are preventable.
The fact that they still occur and cause so many
victims shows that we need to do more to protect our
populations with long-term preventive measures and
structural policies that promote more inclusive, diverse
and tolerant societies.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly
for convening this meeting today and for her
introductory remarks.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union
and by the representative of Denmark on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
My statement will therefore be very brief. I will focus

on three main points that we would like to add to
today’s debate.
First, Slovakia welcomes the eleventh report of the
Secretary-General (A/73/898), which comes at a time
when the actions of the international community and
Member States fall short of fully deterring atrocity
crimes. There is a much-needed shift from reactive
to preventive actions. Slovakia fully supports the
views and recommendations of the Secretary-General
aimed at strengthening preventive efforts. After all,
prevention is inherently incorporated within the pillars
of the responsibility to protect (R2P). R2P should be
perceived as an opportunity to anticipate atrocity
crimes and to act early to prevent them. Addressing
the root causes of such crimes needs to be a priority
because the best way to protect is to prevent.
In 2005, all Member States made a strong
commitment to the responsibility to protect. That
commitment binds Member States to act as primary
protectors of their own populations and to shield them
from potential mass atrocities. In that pursuit, with
the consent of the host State, and preferably at its
own request, the international community can, and
should, extend a helping hand to assist the efforts of
individual States.
Secondly, anchoring the protection of individuals
and groups against discrimination and exclusion is as an
essential step, which must be accompanied by universal
access to justice and non-selective accountability. In
that context, we believe that it is vital to reiterate the role
of the International Criminal Court as an independent
and impartial judicial body that steps in where national
jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to address the
issue of accountability. In that capacity, it serves as a
deterrent and a guarantor of the non-recurrence of mass
atrocities. Therefore, we call on all States Members of
the United Nations that have not yet done so to ratify the
Rome Statute and its amendments and thereby help to
achieve its universality and bolster preventive efforts.
Thirdly and lastly, as co-Chair of the Group of
Friends of Security Sector Reform, Slovakia believes that
fostering that agenda can contribute to a secure and just
environment and provide guarantees of non-recurrence.
Effective security institutions, together with a system
based on the rule of law, can ensure that the rights of
individuals are respected and perpetrators are brought
to justice. The enhancement of national capacities and
the building of strong institutions are key to the pursuit

of resilient systems and, by extension, early action
to prevent atrocities. Strengthening security sector
reform efforts in the aftermath of violence can act as a
catalyst for change towards the overall stabilization and
reconstruction of societies in transition in particular.
In conclusion, Slovakia is firmly committed to
the implementation of all pillars of the responsibility
to protect. Only united action can effectively prevent
atrocities and protect the innocent.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for having convened
this important meeting on the responsibility to protect
(R2P) and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. I also
wish to note that the United Arab Emirates welcomes
the fact that such a meeting is being held for the second
consecutive year thanks to the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the international community to focus on
the principle of R2P in a world of more protracted
conflicts that is more dangerous to its peoples.
The United Arab Emirates associates itself with the
content of the Secretary-General’s report (A/73/898) on
the importance of being committed to multilateralism
and international law in order to entrench and activate
the conceptual framework of R2P. We therefore
reiterate our international commitments within the
framework of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and we call
on Member States to do the same. The United Arab
Emirates also underscores the importance of a foreign
policy based on humanitarian action so as to support
States to enable them to shoulder their responsibility
and protect their societies.
My country believes that R2P is first and foremost
the obligation of States, as well as a right in itself,
which is linked to specific responsibilities, the most
important of which is to protect the entire population
and ensure their well-being. That must be the key
focus of Governments, as well as prioritizing diversity,
pluralism and multilateralism. We must enhance and
build societies that counter hate speech and support
national authorities in strengthening their capacity to
prevent brutal crimes, as the Secretary-General clearly
points out in his recent report.
The United Arab Emirates believes that effective
prevention is the basis and that the sovereign State
has a responsibility to provide protection that includes

addressing the root causes of conflicts. Since we
believe that incitement to hatred is among the root
causes of conflicts, my country adopted an approach
based on tolerance and has declared 2019 as the Year
of Tolerance in our country. We have enacted laws
to criminalize hatred and discrimination based on
differences between religions, races and sects in order
to bolster coexistence and tolerance in our society.
The United Arab Emirates also stresses the
fundamental importance of the rule of law in ending
impunity and ensuring accountability for collective
atrocity crimes in order to prevent their recurrence.
Enhancing early-warning systems is an important step
towards the elimination of genocide. Verifying crimes
through the establishment of integrated and agreed datacollection mechanisms represents another fundamental
step towards ensuring a quick and appropriate response
to any developments.
Our meeting today reflects our collective
commitment to R2P. Before I conclude, I wish to share
with other members the following points.
First, we must support the Secretary-General’s
agenda on prevention. The issue of preventing brutal
crimes should be included as a priority item in other
common agendas linked with the three pillars of United
Nations action.
Secondly, we must strengthen national resilience,
in particular through national assessments of risks and
resilience, taking into account gender considerations,
including the enhancement of the role of civilians,
especially women and youth, in prevention efforts and
addressing atrocities.
Thirdly, we must multiply debates and efforts on
prevention and R2P in the regions concerned, including
capitals and regional centres. The United Arab Emirates
believes that regional and national solutions will enable
us to take important steps towards ending brutal crimes
and preventing their recurrence in the future.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): At the outset, I wish
to align myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
We wish also to thank Ms. Karen Smith and
Mr. Adama Dieng for their tireless efforts to prevent
atrocities and to protect the people of the world
against them.

As most speakers have noted, it is fitting that we
are gathered here again to discuss the responsibility
to protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. I think
that the key word here is the responsibility to protect,
because we have seen that gaps exist and that the need
for prevention and for protecting the people of the world
has become a necessity for us all.
We reiterate that the duty to prevent and to halt
genocide and mass atrocities lies primarily — I stress
“primarily” — with Member States, by committing to
protect their own populations against genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
The international community has the moral
authority and the obligation to assist Member States in
fulfilling this primary responsibility. Based on our own
experience in 1994, we find it morally justifiable, if a
State has manifestly failed to protect its own citizens
from mass atrocities and genocide and all peaceful
measures have failed, for the international community
should shoulder the responsibility to intervene through
coercive measures, including military means, in order
to halt acts of genocide and ethnic cleansing.
We cannot just sit around and grapple with theories
and principles when the reality is that innocent citizens
are being massacred by those who are supposed to
protect them. In principle, we must agree on the fact
that intervention is warranted.
However, this should not legitimize the use
of unilateral coercive measures. The international
community as a whole should be encouraged to expand
multilateral options in order to streamline the nature
and the scope of such interventions. The architects of
such interventions should also refrain from any attempt
to focus their efforts on regime change; rather, more
effort should be put into saving lives and protecting
innocent people.
It is of the utmost importance that Governments,
regional organizations and the international community
focus their attention on addressing the underlying
causes of conflict. At the national level, our postconflict experience in Rwanda has shown that this
requires the development of strong institutions that
establish the foundations of good governance based on
the rule of law, democratic principles, shared values
and accountability.

Allow me to touch on a few points from the
Secretary-Generals report on “Responsibility to
protect; lessons learned for prevention” (A/73/898),
which was released earlier this month.
First, we support the emphasis on preventive action,
which is preferable to responding only after crises have
erupted. We need to avoid the United Nations being used
as a fire extinguisher. Preventive measures should be
an integral part of national, regional and international
mechanisms to prevent atrocity crimes. At the national
level, strengthening the rule of law is an integral element
of prevention. In addition, it is important for postconflict States to invest in efforts aimed at sustaining
peace, such as justice and reconciliation measures.
Secondly, we endorse the key recommendations
made in the report of the Secretary-General, including
combating hate speech in the digital space. My country
is well aware of the devastating impact that hate speech
can have if left unchecked.
I should like to conclude with
recommendations in three related areas.

several

First, concerning accountability, holding those
involved in atrocity crimes accountable is fundamental
to maintaining a credible international system in which
States interact on an equal footing.
Secondly, with respect to peacekeeping, Rwanda,
as a top troop- and police-contributing country,
believes that peacekeeping can be a catalytic tool to
stabilize countries where they are deployed, allowing
for a conducive atmosphere for such actors to establish
peace. The Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians enhance peacekeeping missions by placing
the protection of civilians at the heart of peacekeeping
missions. We encourage more Member States to endorse
these Principles.
Thirdly, and lastly, I turn to the issue of women
and peace and security. It is unfortunate that sexual
and gender-based violence is a constant feature of
conflicts around the world. States must therefore
carry out interventions that focus on victims of sexual
and gender-based violence, and they must hold those
responsible to account.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the members of the Pacific Islands Forum
represented at the United Nations, namely, Australia,
Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua

New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu
and Vanuatu.
The Forum members would like to thank the
Secretary-General, through his Chef de Cabinet, and the
President of the General Assembly for their statements.
We also commend the Secretary-General for his report
(A/73/898) and its focus on the importance of early
warning and early action in response to the risk of
mass atrocities.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the
implementation of the principle of the responsibility to
protect (R2P), as set out in paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome document, must be
our collective focus. Our task is not to renegotiate or
reinterpret the commitments our leaders made in 2005; it
is to implement them. We therefore welcome the debate
in the Assembly today. Our hope is that this can be part
of an ongoing dialogue in the Assembly about how we
can better protect populations from mass atrocities,
including by sharing experiences, perspectives and
lessons learned to help improve practice internationally,
regionally and domestically. We also agree with the
Secretary-General that the implementation of R2P and
the prioritization of prevention in the United Nations
system are interlinked and complementary. As his
report highlights, preventive capabilities need to be
cultivated at all levels so that early warning also means
early action.
Pacific Island Forum members believe that early
dialogue, partnership and action, in particular at
the regional level, are critical to delivering on our
responsibility to protect. The importance of early
warning and early action was recognized and enshrined
by Forum members in the Biketawa Declaration, which
was agreed in Kiribati at the beginning of this century.
That important document recognizes the vulnerability
of all Forum members to civil unrest and other threats
to our population’s security. The Declaration articulates
a common commitment to resolving conflicts through
regional cooperation. It has served as the springboard
for a number of regional assistance missions, including
a highly successful mission — the Regional Assistance
Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) — that
commenced in 2003 and concluded last year.
RAMSI was a partnership between the people and
the Government of Solomon Islands and 15 contributing
countries from the Pacific region. The mission’s
mandate was to help lay the foundations for long-term

stability and prosperity in Solomon Islands, including
by restoring civil order, rebuilding the machinery
of Government and helping rebuild its economy. The
consent of, and partnership with, Solomon Islands
was a prerequisite for the mission and an essential
element of its success. RAMSI’s regional identity
was its core underlying strength. Every Pacific Island
Forum country participated in RAMSI, and the mission
benefited from the diverse cultures and experience
of contributing members. Since 2003, thousands of
police, military and civilian personnel from across the
region served with RAMSI, walking side by side with
Solomon Islanders.
Another critical reason for RAMSI’s success is
that assistance was requested and provided in the early
stages of unrest, lawlessness and violence. The warning
signs were present and action was taken. This is an
example of pillar II of R2P in action.
Pacific Islands Forum leaders have committed
to negotiating an updated Biketawa plus declaration
to guide regional responses to emerging security
challenges. At the heart of that commitment is a
recognition that no one country alone can meet the
security challenges we face.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statements made on behalf of the European Union
and the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
I will add several points in my national capacity.
The responsibility to protect (R2P) remains
one of the most suitable principles around which the
international community can rally when populations
at risk face the threat of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. States have
undertaken a number of measures to date to strengthen
their resilience to atrocity crimes. At the national level,
more than 60 States and two regional organizations
have appointed focal points and reviewed or adopted
mechanisms to strengthen resilience to atrocity crimes,
and are continuing to explore and establish national
arrangements to prevent serious crimes. Croatia is
proud to be among them.
Croatia encourages regional organizations to take
a more active role in promoting and implementing this
concept. We stand ready to engage strategically with all
stakeholders in order to promote general awareness of
R2P through public awareness campaigns and sharing
national best practices in this regard.

We welcome this year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/73/898), focused on lessons learned for
prevention. All around the world we are witnessing a
dangerous increase of hate language used by radicalized
groups, or even political leaders, which can easily
slide into incitement to hate crimes, as we have seen
in recent attacks against religious and minority groups
particularly exposed to these challenges. It is high time
that we finally draw lessons from this and recognize
and expose such dangerous narratives appropriately
and on time.
Croatia pays particular attention to conflict
prevention, the rule of law and the promotion of
democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms,
while recognizing that such efforts are an investment
in addressing root causes of conflict and fostering
prevention. Prevention and national accountability for
protection are cornerstones in reducing atrocity crimes.
Putting our national commitments to this concept
into practice, Croatia has positioned its national
accountability for prevention and resilience at the top
of its priorities.
It has become increasingly difficult to reach
consensus in the Security Council when it comes to
issues concerning the protection of human rights.
Therefore, we call for better utilization of the Council’s
working methods to take potential mass atrocity
situations into consideration as early as possible.
We support open debates on R2P and attach great
importance to briefings from the Secretary-General’s
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect regarding early warning
on situations where populations are at risk.

new Special Adviser on R2P. We are confident that her
knowledge and experience will contribute to the further
advancement of the implementation of R2P within the
United Nations system.
We are especially concerned over the worrisome
trend of forced displacement being used as a military
tactic, as well as sexual and gender-based violence
being increasingly employed as a strategy by State
and non-State perpetrators. When committed in a
widespread or systematic manner, such acts may
amount to crimes against humanity, war crimes or acts
of genocide. That applies in particular to disastrous
events, at great expense of minority populations, who
are always among the most vulnerable.
Croatia reiterates the need for all Member States
to uphold their obligations under international human
rights law, international humanitarian law and
international refugee law, as a foundation of upholding
the principle of R2P. Last year, we marked the seventieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. We urge
Member States that have not yet ratified or acceded to
the Convention to do so as a matter of priority.
Finally, we cannot stress enough the importance
of States upholding their primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdictions. Croatia voices its support for the
International Criminal Court, which remains the most
important institutional development in the battle to
end impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

As a current member of the Human Rights
Council, Croatia encourages further strengthening
of links between the Human Rights Council and the
Security Council for early warning and early action.
Geneva-based institutions and mechanisms, such as
the Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
mandate holders, as well as appointed fact-finding
missions and commissions of inquiry, play a unique
role in preventing mass atrocity crimes.

Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): Venezuela, both in its national
legislation and in practice, is committed to respect and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
We therefore reject the commission of crimes against
humanity, war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing,
all of which are specified in the Rome Statute, to which
we are a signatory party. We reaffirm the role of the
State as guarantor of the security of its population at all
times, and voice our support for justice to be done in
cases where such crimes have been committed.

Equally important, the work of the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect makes it possible to
mainstream R2P within the United Nations system.
Croatia encourages continuing this progress and
welcomes the appointment of Ms. Karen Smith as the

Much is said about the importance of prevention.
Who can really oppose the prevention of conflicts or
atrocity crimes, when all States, by signing the Charter
of the United Nations, undertook to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, to promote social
progress and to ensure respect for fundamental human

rights? The same founding Charter, which is binding
on all, also includes principles governing international
relations, such as the legal equality of States, the selfdetermination of peoples, abstention from the use or
threat of use of force against the political independence
of any State, and non-intervention in the internal affairs
of another State. For our country, prevention implies
respect for all of the principles of international law
under the Charter. We must make greater use of the
tools of multilateralism and diplomacy for the peaceful
resolution of disputes, including political dialogue, in
line with Chapters VI and VII of the Charter.
The notion of the responsibility to protect is of
concern to States because of the lack of agreement
on its definition and scope. Many questions continue
unanswered to this day. Who, and on what basis,
determines what State is not protecting its population?
Who determines, and on which criteria, what action
should be taken? How can we prevent its selective
implementation? How can we prevent the responsibility
to protect from being used as a pretext for politically and
economically motivated interventions, including those
disguised as humanitarianism? Why do we not speak
of the responsibility to protect when the Palestinian
people are massacred?
In practice, this notion has been used to promote
invasions that have resulted in suffering, death and
destruction in countries that today still suffer from their
consequences. The peoples were never protected — they
were only an excuse to bring about regime change and
plunder the resources of sovereign nations. This notion,
which at first might have had good intentions behind it,
today lacks total legitimacy, since it is used to intervene
in the internal affairs of States and destroy their
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
If the real objective is to protect the population,
why not promote international cooperation in the fight
against poverty, hunger and social inequality? Why
not put an end to the illegal imposition of unilateral
coercive measures and so-called secondary sanctions?
The world will not continue to be deceived by talk about
human rights, on the one hand, and the imposition of
economic measures that are acts of aggression and
crimes against humanity, on the other. That is the
double standard of racist and supremacist empires that
sustain their domination through wars of colonization
against free and sovereign countries.

Those who manipulate the notion of the
responsibility to protect have destroyed the consensus
that began in 2005, with the World Summit Outcome
document, and ended in 2017, when a vote was forced
here in the Hall (see A/72/PV.2). The naive phase of
humanitarian interventionism is over.
In conclusion, we reject the inclusion of this
item on the agenda of the General Assembly since
Venezuela, as a nation, has been the target of attacks
by the same colonial Powers that perverted the notion
of the responsibility to protect in order to plunder our
national assets and apply economic terrorism against
our people. There are no armed conflicts in Venezuela
today. We are not a threat to anyone. And our public
order is guaranteed by our democratic institutions.
Respect for all the principles set out in the Charter
of the United Nations is the only way to protect our
freedom and our right to peace.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this debate. I also commend the engagement
of eight Member States — Afghanistan, Denmark,
Guatemala, the Netherlands, Romania, Rwanda,
Ukraine and Uruguay — for bringing this agenda to
a formal debate at the General Assembly, together
with Japan.
The number of attacks on medical staff and
facilities are on the rise, and forced displacement is at
an all-time high. Sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict has also increased significantly. It is therefore
all the more important for all Member States to discuss
how the international community can prevent atrocities
from taking place, and what concrete actions each
Member State can take to achieve that end. Today I
will talk about Japan’s contribution in the area of the
responsibility to protect with regard to the assistance
we provide to other Member States with a view to
preventing atrocities.
I agree with the mention in this year’s report of
the Secretary-General (A/73/898) of the provision of
support to national authorities. Japan believes that
strengthening the capacity of security and judiciary
sectors at the national level and empowering women
would ensure the protection of human rights, improve
the planning and management of criminal justice
related to institutions and contribute to the stabilization
of the situation on the ground, and thereby help to
prevent atrocity crimes. Japan has been an active player

in the field, assisting national efforts of Member States
to protect their people through the mobilization of our
official development assistance for capacity-building
and the protection of women.
First, with regard to our contribution to capacitybuilding in the security and judiciary sectors, I am
proud to share with colleagues today that Japan will
continue to lend assistance through its training course
“Criminal Justice for French-Speaking African
Countries” for another five years, starting this year.
The programme is designed to support participants
from African countries — namely, Burkina Faso,
Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and
Senegal — who work in the field criminal justice.
Secondly, with regard to providing assistance
for the protection of women, Japan has been working
closely with UN-Women as well as the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
regarding women’s leadership, empowerment, access
and protection in Kenya, Egypt, Iraq and Jordan and
on projects to address sexual violence in conflict in
Iraq, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In August, we will host the
seventh Tokyo International Conference on African
Development in Yokohama, Japan, where we will
discuss how to strengthen peace and stability as one of
the pillars, as well as the issues that I just mentioned.
We strongly believe that the collective efforts of the
international community in such areas will help to
advance the implementation of the prevention agenda.
Thirdly, in addition to the assistance that I just
mentioned, I would like to add that Japan believes
that the Security Council should play an active role in
preventing conflicts. Unfortunately, we have witnessed
some cases where the Security Council failed to fulfil
its function to prevent or end mass atrocities owing to
the use of the veto. In that regard, I emphasize that Japan
continues to support the initiative by France and Mexico
on veto restraint in cases of mass atrocities, as well as
the code of conduct developed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group.
We should all redouble our efforts to protect people
from atrocities. The international community needs to
take stock of past practices and share lessons learned, as
the Secretary-General mentions in his report. Japan is
ready to collaborate with the international community
on this critical issue.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation took note of the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/73/898. We support in principle some of the report’s
content about the primary responsibility of States to
protect their citizens and the role and responsibility
of the United Nations, as a collective organization, to
bolster the early-warning systems aimed at preventing
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
With regard to today’s meeting, my delegation,
supported by a significant number of Member States,
still rejects this exclusionary and unprofessional
approach in convening such a meeting, repeatedly
called for by certain States in order to exploit and
politicize the concept of the responsibility to protect
(R2P). That exacerbates the dispute in the General
Assembly regarding humanitarian issues, which are
both noble and just.
Everyone in this Hall knows that the world in which
we live today is far from ideal and that the United
Nations is going through a critical but crucial phase in
its work and performance. That is due to the significant
phenomenon of political and financial polarization.
At the same time, everyone knows the catastrophic
consequences and the war crimes perpetrated by the
Governments of certain Member States as a result of
individually misusing the concept of R2P without a
United Nations mandate in order to implement their
own foreign policies, leading to aggression and military
invasion outside international legitimacy.
From this rostrum, we will continue to remind
all Member States that, in one of his reports on R2P,
the Secretary-General explicitly recognized the
serious concerns arising from the misuse by certain
Governments of the concept of R2P in Libya, which is
a country rich in resources and people. That country is
now tragically living in a state of destruction, chaos,
political disputes, bloody conflict and the spread of
terrorism due to the military operations and air strikes
of the armies of certain Governments that claim to
be protecting civilians in Libya. In fact, they are
destroying Libya and its capabilities and resources
while fragmenting its people and undermining its
national political unity.
However, the great disaster today is that the
same Governments, which have sent their military
planes, fleets and destroyers to Libya, Iraq, Syria and

other States throughout the world, are determined to
repeatedly commit the same war crimes in other regions
of the world under the same pretext of exercising R2P
and bolstering democracy and human rights, as they say.
Every time we debate these issues, representatives of
the Governments that have long carried out occupation
and committed aggression reiterate the same sentence
again and again, namely, that the pretext of national
sovereignty of certain States will not prevent these
Governments from protecting the peoples of those
States against violations of human rights. We ask the
representatives of these Governments what logic would
make us accept their exploitation of the concept of R2P
as a pretext to wage aggression against Member States,
killing tens of thousands of civilians, destroying the
capabilities of States, displacing millions of people
and drowning thousands of them in the seas, while
disseminating terrorism throughout the world and
creating and expanding the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. It is an important question addressed
to all Member States.
When we simply read some of the details of the
recent Secretary-General’s report on the concept of
R2P, we certainly see that there is a suspicious trend to
promote the three artificial pillars of the concept of R2P,
in particular the third pillar, which is always exploited in
order to carry out military aggression and wars against
many States in the world. Even worse is the fact that the
authors of the report are determined to ignore the lack
of significant agreement among Member States on the
parameters and guarantees in implementing R2P. They
are also determined to ignore the practical concerns
over a lack of assurances and constraints that would
ensure the non-recurrence of exploiting the concept of
R2P as a pretext to undermine the sovereignty of States
and interfere in their domestic affairs.
We in the Syrian Arab Republic resolutely respect
the Charter of the United Nations and, as the English
saying goes, we go by the book. The book is the
Charter, which contains binding provisions for all
Member States. The Charter is the one and only book.
That is why we say that we go by the book. We will also
continue to refuse the politicization of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document.
In that context, we emphasize once again that
those responsible for the widely differing views of
Member States on R2P that we are seeing today are the
Governments that are working, together with certain

Secretariat personnel, to establish the erroneous pillars
and legal basis for R2P.
The majority of Member States are totally
convinced that paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome document do not recognize
R2P as a principle. Rather, they have emphasized
the established, fundamental and genuine principles
contained in the Charter of the United Nations and
linked to the maintenance of international peace and
security; saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war; recognizing the fundamental human
rights and the dignity of the human person; and
promoting social progress and better standards of life
in larger freedom while respecting the sovereignty of
States and non-interference in their internal affairs.
Some want to go back to the time of League
of Nations, to legalize the concepts of mandate,
trusteeship, occupation and colonization. That is the
main difference between the League of Nations and the
United Nations. The United Nations has put an end to
the historic mistake represented by the undertakings of
the League of Nations, which legitimized occupation
and war. That is why the League of Nations failed and
the United Nations was created to put an end to that
historic mistake pertaining to the performance and
conduct of the League.
My country, Syria, along with other significant
number of Member States, continues to reject this
exclusionary approach and to oppose the inclusion of
the R2P item on the agenda of the General Assembly,
especially since the informal consultations held have
not yet overcome the core differences between Member
States or moved towards engaging positively in
discussing the real concerns related to this issue.
The Syrian Arab Republic, as a founding Member
of the Organization, is determined to remain faithful
to the Charter and to not give in to practices of
intimidation and polarization at any cost. That is
why the crisis in my country has continued for eight
years now. For eight years we have rejected policies of
polarization, extortion and intimidation. Based on that,
we will keep opposing those who promote controversial
issues, and we call upon all Members to admit that
the United Nations remains unable to shoulder its
serious responsibility of protecting the Syrian and
Palestinian peoples from the Israeli occupation and
its supporters; that the United Nations is unable to
activate an early-warning system to protect the Syrians

and the Iraqis from the acts of terrorism perpetrated
by Da’esh, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations; that the United Nations has
also failed in activating an international early-warning
and cooperation system to combat the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, which involves Governments
and intelligence services; and that the United Nations
is unable to exercise the R2P or to address the crimes
that are being committed by the illicit international
coalition, led by the United States, against the Syrian
people. Those crimes have led, according to United
Nations reports, to the total destruction of the city of
Raqqa and the semi-destruction of the ancient city
of Palmyra, the killing of thousands of civilians in
Syria and the destruction of infrastructure, bridges
and electrical and water plants under the pretext of
combating terrorism. The destruction of monuments has
become part of combating terrorism. The destruction of
States Members of the Organization has become part
of combating terrorism. The total destruction of cities
has become part of combating terrorism. The critical
question is: What terrorism are they speaking about? Is
it the terrorism that they themselves created?
When the Secretariat and the Governments of
certain Member States recognize that these issues
reflect the failure of the United Nations to respect
and implement the purposes and principles of the
Charter, then and only then will Syria and many other
Member States that cherish, in words and in deeds, the
principles of freedom, justice and equality be prepared
to transparently debate R2P, so as to reach a consensus
on the parameters of the concept and guarantees on
its non-use for political objectives that run counter to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations and
its Charter.
In conclusion, we call on Members, with great
positivity and openness, to return to the format of
informal consultations on this issue, as that is the
only practical way forward where we can express our
concerns and reach the desired consensus. Let us all
remember that our duty as Member States is to support
the status and capability of the United Nations so that
it can remain the collective platform that allows us to
debate our serious disputes and concerns related to
controversial and sensitive concepts and principles
that can have a negative impact on the future and the
horizons of the Organization, which must remain the
only international umbrella under which we gather.

All Members know that certain Governments are
exploiting this situation so as to not commit themselves
to the mandate of the competent organ of the United
Nations responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, namely, the Security Council.
Their aim is to carry out personal, selfish political
and military practices that run counter to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, practices that which
eventually threaten international peace and security.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the observer of the
European Union and by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility
to Protect.
Romania commends the inclusion of the subject of
today’s debate, on the responsibility to protect (R2P),
in the formal agenda of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly, as my country was one of the nine
Member States that made this request.
We welcome the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsibility to protect (A/73/898) and
its focus on lessons learned for prevention, as we believe
that the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity is fundamental
for the peace and stability of our world. We welcome
also the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral and the measures proposed to be taken both at
the national and international levels in order to advance
this agenda.
In our national capacity, we are determined
to work for the prevention of international crimes,
and in this respect my country has taken several
measures. We appointed a national contact point
from the Romanian Public Ministry to the European
network for investigation and prosecution of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. In 2005, we
established the Elie Wiesel National Institute for the
Study of the Holocaust in Romania, and in 2018 the
Network for Genocide Prevention and Multidisciplinary
Research into Mass Graves, aimed at building the
capacity to prevent and investigate genocide. Romania
is also an active member of the International Holocaust
Remembrance Alliance, including in the area of the
prevention of genocide.
My country ratified the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and has enacted national legislation in accordance with
its provisions. Romania disseminates knowledge about

the principles of the Convention, including judicial
training through courses on public international law
and through seminars for justice professionals. The
Romanian Public Ministry, in cooperation with the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and other Government
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations,
organizes training for judges and State officials
involved in criminal investigations on topics pertaining
to the Holocaust, genocide prevention and mass
grave investigations.
In 2015, Romania submitted its unilateral
declaration accepting the compulsory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, as part of our
commitment to international law and in recognition of
the prominent contribution of the Court to international
peace. We encourage others to consider taking action
in support of the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations.
We share the Secretary-General’s focus on
the importance of early action when it comes to
responsibility to protect. Romania is fully committed
to the protection of civilians, supports humanitarian
action and has joined several international initiatives
aimed at protecting the population, especially

vulnerable groups, such as children. We are also
engaged with police officers and military personnel in
ensuring that peacekeeping missions have a protection
of civilians mandate.
My country believes that regional organizations
have to play a key role in preventing and responding to
mass atrocities, as they can assess the situation on the
ground and the regional context at first hand. That was
stressed during the ninth annual meeting of the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points, which took place in May.
In conclusion, I would like to add my voice to
those who showed support today for the principle of
the responsibility to protect and acknowledged the
importance of developing preventive capacities. Allow
me to also express my appreciation for the activities
of the Global Centre for R2P, both as secretariat of the
Global Network of R2P Focal Points and as a United
Nations partner in promoting R2P globally.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item for this meeting. We
shall hear the remaining speakers this afternoon at 3
p.m. here in the Hall.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

