Seventy-third session

95th plenary meeting

Friday, 28 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Yelchenko
(Ukraine), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/73/L.95)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.95.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
honour to address the Council today on my own
behalf and on behalf of my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Canada, as co-facilitators for draft
resolution A/73/L.95, entitled “Commemoration of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the International
Conference on Population and Development”.
The International Conference on Population
and Development, held in Cairo in 1994, and its
Programme of Action are important means to promote
the issue of population. The Conference set out a new
and progressive vision on the relationship between
population and development, and between prosperity
and the rights of the individual. The Conference held
in Cairo saw the adoption by 179 States of the 20-year
Programme of Action, which was extended in 2010,

as a comprehensive indicator of development progress
based on the individual. The Programme of Action was
pivotal in promoting sexual and reproductive health,
the empowerment of women and gender equality,
which are the cornerstones of the population and
development agenda.
The issue of population is the common platform
that forms the basis of the Cairo Programme of Action,
specifically, and other development plans in general.
Success in implementing the Cairo Plan of Action will
certainly bolster efforts to achieve 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Based on all this, Egypt and Canada were keen to
submit a procedural draft resolution to commemorate
25 years since the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development was held in Cairo. The
draft resolution sets aside an evening session on 16 July
for the General Assembly to commemorate 25 years
of the Conference and to serve as an opportunity to
exchange viewpoints and lessons learned with the aim
of advancing national, regional and international efforts
to expedite the implementation of the outcome of the
Conference and contribute to the Nairobi meeting in
November. We wanted this commemoration to coincide
with the High-level Political Forum so as to benefit
from the high-level participation of Member States and
stakeholders, including the private sector, academia
and civil society, as well as to strengthen links for
implementing the two agendas.
With a view to ensuring good and constructive
relations with all delegations of Member States, in recent

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

weeks Egypt and Canada have held a series of bilateral
consultations with a large number of them, as well as
with regional groups. During those consultations, we
listened to their proposals and views on the procedural
draft resolution. That was followed by three sessions
of governmental consultations, on 6, 10 and 18 June,
during which we examined the procedural rules and
agreed practices. All those consultations and meetings
have led to the draft resolution in its current form.
In conclusion, on my behalf and on behalf of my
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Canada,
I would like to thank all delegations for their positive
involvement in and support for our efforts as facilitators
of the governmental consultations. We would also like
to thank the delegations that sponsored the procedural
draft resolution. Let me further thank all colleagues in
the Secretariat, the staff of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly and the United Nations
Population Fund for their efforts and sincere cooperation
with the delegations of Egypt and Canada during the
preparation of this procedural draft resolution.
We look forward to seeing the President of the
General Assembly and others on the evening of
16 July to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population
and Development.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.95, entitled
“Commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population
and Development”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.95: Argentina, Australia, Benin,
Cabo Verde, the Central African Republic, Comoros,
Djibouti, Eritrea, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Japan, Lebanon, Libya, Kenya, Kiribati, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Yemen and Zambia.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.95?
Draft resolution A/73/L.95
(resolution 73/303).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of position
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We welcome the General Assembly’s
decision to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the convening of the International Conference
on Population and Development. We consider the
Programme of Action adopted at the Conference to be
a fundamental document for international cooperation
in population and development that should not be
amended or edited. We are of the view that the work of
the bodies and agencies of the United Nations system in
this area should be based on the basic principles of the
Programme of Action that were agreed on 25 years ago,
and not on their arbitrary interpretation.
In that context, our delegation supported resolution
73/303, which was just adopted, in order to strengthen
the principle of consensus, although not all the
resolution’s provisions fully take our approaches into
account. We are guided by the fact that the text that
was adopted does not set a precedent for the holding
of such events with respect to the participation of
non-governmental organizations in the meeting. We
also expect that all States will have the opportunity to
speak in the upcoming meeting, if they are interested in
doing so, and that their statements will be given priority.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/73/L.94)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.94.

Mr. Jinga (Romania): The European Union is
pleased to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.94, entitled
“Towards torture-free trade: examining the feasibility,
scope and parameters for possible common international
standards”, on behalf of the 66 members of the Global
Alliance for Torture-Free Trade and numerous other
States that are committed to seeing the international
community take collective steps forward on this issue.
All States are welcome to join the Alliance.
This is a timely moment for such an initiative,
falling two days after the international community
marked the International Day in Support of Victims of
Torture to honour victims and survivors throughout the
world. Today we have an opportunity to turn our words
into action.
The reason why so many States have come together
to call for greater scrutiny of this trade is simple. It is
unconscionable to turn a blind eye to the import and
export of goods that can be used to inflict torture,
suffering and even death. Permit me to cite some
examples: the spiked baton, which is a truncheon
with sharp metal spikes along part or all of its shaft;
the electric-shock belt equipped to deliver extremely
painful electric shocks, which is fixed around the
victim’s body; and the portable gas chamber, which
requires no further explanation.
The international community is united in its
condemnation of torture and has on many occasions
underscored the imperative of working towards
its eradication. Put simply, torture is illegal under
international law. Some 166 States have ratified
the United Nations Convention against Torture and
have thereby pledged to take effective legislative,
administrative, judicial and other measures to prevent
acts of torture in their territory. Taking steps to address
the trade in torture goods is a critical way in which such
prevention can be assured.
The trade in goods that can only be used for torture
and other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or
punishment has been a long-standing concern at the
United Nations. Indeed, over 30 years ago, the first
Special Rapporteur on Torture, who was appointed
by the Commission on Human Rights, addressed
the issue in an early report. Subsequent Rapporteurs
have scrutinized the torture trade in more detail and
underscored the importance of controlling that trade
in order to deliver on the international community’s
commitment to eradicating torture. Several resolutions

have called for action in this field — most recently
resolution 72/163, on torture, which was adopted
by consensus on 17 December 2017. Regional
organizations, such as the African Union Commission
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe have recognized the seriousness of the torture
trade and recommended action.
In bringing forward the draft resolution under
consideration today, we have taken care to ensure
a careful step-by-step approach that avoids making
snap judgements as to how the torture trade should
be addressed. Our proposed approach is intended
first and foremost to solicit the views of all States
Members of the United Nations as to how common
international standards might be formulated in future.
The views of all Member States will form the basis
for the Secretary-General’s report that will then be
taken up for consideration by a group of governmental
experts chosen on the basis of equitable geographical
distribution. That group of experts will be charged with
reporting to the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly. This process is designed to deliver food for
thought in an efficient and transparent manner and to
support an open and constructive engagement among
the States Members of the United Nations. It does not
prejudge what further steps might then be taken by the
international community. It does not lock in further
action in New York or Geneva.
We have also sought to ensure that the negotiation
process was fair and transparent. We have held three
informal consultative meetings to garner views and
made a range of changes to the text. The text now
makes a crystal-clear demarcation between goods used
for torture and those used for the death penalty and
does not entail judgments on the death penalty. The
draft does provide that instruments used to apply the
death penalty are to be included within the purview of
the Secretary-General’s report, because certain goods
that are traded, including portable gas chambers, can
be used in ways that inflict undue suffering.
We have heard concerns from some States during
the informal consultations that the draft resolution
conflates trade and human rights concerns in an
inappropriate way — and even that we have been
motivated by protectionist instincts. We would like
to reassure those who made these points. First, the
members of the Global Alliance have a proven record
in advancing free trade and are core supporters of a
multilateral trading system. A commitment to free trade

does not mean that we should tolerate the import and
export of goods that have been specifically designed
to maim and kill. Secondly, it is by no means unusual
for the United Nations to deliberate on issues that bring
together trade and human rights considerations. The
Kimberley Process governing blood diamonds and the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights are just two examples. The text makes it
clear that the initiative does not aim at creating barriers
to international trade.
We do not claim that the draft resolution before the
General Assembly today has all the answers. Torture
can of course be inflicted with a fist or a pencil. But we
do contend that turning a blind eye to the torture trade
can only empower those who resort to torture and can
only help to legitimize an illegal international practice.
We call on all members of the General Assembly to
support the adoption of draft resolution A/73/L.94
today and to join us in adopting this initiative designed
to boost the collective global fight against torture.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.94.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Tang (Singapore): I am taking the floor to
deliver an explanation of vote before the voting on
the draft resolution that has just been introduced
(A/73/L.94).
My delegation is deeply disappointed with the draft
resolution submitted for action today. Singapore does
not condone torture. However, the draft resolution is
fundamentally flawed, both in terms of substance and
process. In terms of substance, the draft resolution is
asking the General Assembly to legislate and regulate
matters of international trade. From the outset, my
delegation expressed strong concern that the draft
resolution is forcing international trade issues to be
decided by the General Assembly when it is not the
appropriate body to do so.
In terms of process, the sponsors have shown no
interest in engaging delegations with different views.
There were absolutely no probatory discussions on
this issue. Only three informal consultations were
held, during which many delegations questioned
why the sponsors were so eager to push through the

draft resolution in such a short time frame, without
producing any data on the actual volumes of trade in
the categories of goods in question. It was very clear
that the sponsors were neither interested nor committed
to engaging delegations with different views.
I will now outline my delegation’s specific concerns
with the draft resolution.
First, the draft resolution seeks to establish new
conditionalities on international trade that could be
used to justify protectionism. Ultimately, these new
conditionalities will impede the flow of international
trade and undermine the rules-based multilateral
trading system. What is most disappointing is that the
sponsors of the draft resolution have always claimed
to be advocates of an open rules-based and transparent
multilateral trading system, which is also ironic, as this
comes at a time when the sponsors have been making
strong calls against protectionism. May I also say that
we were neither reassured not convinced by the points
just made in this regard by the main sponsor during the
introduction of the draft resolution.
As a small and open country that is deeply committed
to the rules-based multilateral trading system and whose
life blood is international trade, Singapore is firmly
of the view that it is inappropriate that the General
Assembly adopt draft resolution A/73/L.94. At a time
when unilateralism is on the rise and protectionism
is rearing its ugly head, the international community
should not introduce additional restrictions that would
shake the core of a predictable, open and rules-based
multilateral trading system. Further, we are deeply
concerned that the draft resolution would provide cover
for deliberate and/or disguised restrictions on free
and open trade between countries. Unfortunately, the
sponsors have not addressed these concerns seriously
and substantively.
The introduction of a new seventh preambular
does not address the fundamental flaw of the draft
resolution. What is most dangerous about the draft
is that it establishes a precedent for the future and
emboldens others to introduce other draft resolutions
that seek to legislate and regulate trade issues based on
controversial criteria or requirements.
Our second concern is that the draft resolution
mandates the Secretary-General to establish a group of
governmental experts to draft parameters for a range
of options to establish common international standards
for the import, export and transfer of goods used for

capital punishment and torture. That mandate is based
on the unfounded premise cited in the sixth preambular
paragraph, without any evidence whatsoever having
been provided, that there is “growing support across all
regions for concluding an international instrument” to
establish such common international standards.
My delegation is of the firm view that the General
Assembly should not rush into creating such a group
of governmental experts before Member States have
had sufficient time to have a more in-depth dialogue
on this issue. The assertions by the co-sponsors during
the informal consultations that the Secretary-General’s
report and the group of governmental experts are in
themselves discussions on the issue are simply not
credible. The fact is that the group of governmental
experts will comprise a closed group of select
individuals who cannot possibly represent the range of
views of 193 Member States. Why are the co-sponsors
reluctant to establish an open-ended working group to
discuss this issue further? Are they afraid of listening
to different views? Imposing common international
standards through a selective and closed process is not
the right way to establish such standards.
Last but not least, the draft resolution conflates
capital punishment with torture — a linkage that is
not supported by international law. In so doing, the
co-sponsors are attempting to impose the unfounded
view that capital punishment is a form of torture when
there is no international consensus in that regard. By
linking the two separate concepts in the draft resolution
and refusing to take on board the legitimate concerns
of many delegations regarding such a linkage, the
members of the Alliance for Torture-Free Trade have
shown that they are interested only in advancing their
own narrow agenda and ideological objectives and in
forcing the General Assembly to endorse their views
through a cynical numbers game.
Singapore will vote against the draft resolution for
all the reasons that I have set out. I would call on other
delegations to do the same.
Mr. Khashaan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation would like to speak in explanation of
vote before the voting on draft resolution A/73/L.94,
entitled “Towards torture-free trade: examining the
feasibility, scope and parameters for possible common
international standards”.
The delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
regrets that the amendments it presented during

the negotiations with the co-sponsors were not
incorporated in the draft resolution. We hoped to
establish and promote the principle of consensus among
all parties with a view to reaching a draft text that was
acceptable to all and reflected all views. My delegation
also expresses its regret over the way in which the
negotiations were conducted. There was no flexibility
and only one voice was heard.
We would like to point out that the draft resolution
includes ambiguous and unclear paragraphs that
contradict its title, which reflects a noble objective
that we support. However, we would like to clarify the
points of objection as follows.
First, the language of the draft resolution can be
attributed to resolution 61/89, entitled “Towards an
arms trade treaty: establishing common international
standards for the import, export and transfer of
conventional arms”. That resolution dealt with
weapons, not torture. The co-sponsors of the draft
resolution copied and pasted certain paragraphs from
the resolution without any amendments except to delete
the mention of weapons and replace it with torture and
capital punishment in a manner that was not professional
or logical.
Secondly, capital punishment does not contravene
the provisions of international law or international
conventions, including the Convention against Torture.
Consequently, capital punishment is not considered
torture. In that regard, my delegation would like to
reiterate that capital punishment in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia is applied only against the most
atrocious crimes and in very limited circumstances, in
accordance with national laws, and only after a clear
condemnation in line with the law and a transparent
and fair trial. All cases of capital punishment are legally
and judicially reviewed by more than 10 judges through
various phases.
Thirdly, in the last round of negotiations the
co-sponsors circulated a list containing a number of
goods that are used for torture, which reflects a good
effort. However, for the sake of transparency, that
list could have been included in one of the operative
paragraphs in order to ensure clarity and end ambiguity
that could be deliberate. Hence there would be a
linkage between free trade and human rights, leading
to new legal grounds for the prohibition of exporting
or importing certain goods based on political, not
commercial, motives.

Fourthly, my delegation believes that there was
unjustified urgency on the part of the co-sponsors
of the draft resolution. Paragraph 1 requests the
Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States
on the feasibility of establishing common international
standards for the import, export and transfer of goods
used for capital punishment or torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It
further requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report on the subject to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session.
Paragraph 2 of the draft resolution also requests the
Secretary-General to establish a group of governmental
experts, to be chosen on the basis of equitable
geographical distribution. It would have been better to
wait and consider the views of States and the outcome
of paragraph 1 and then establish a new mechanism if
need be.
In conclusion, my delegation asserts the inherent
right of States to apply their national laws in a manner
that maintains their security and stability. States
Members of the United Nations should respect and
preserve that right. Based on that, my country will vote
against the draft resolution and we call on all States to
do the same.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has concerns about draft resolution A/73/L.94,
entitled “Towards torture-free trade”, which was
submitted by the European Union.
First of all, it is important to emphasize that
China is a party to the Convention against Torture.
We have always firmly opposed torture, unremittingly
promoting the rule of law, human rights protection
and the prohibition of torture in legislation, law
enforcement, justice and monitoring. China’s position
on the draft resolution has nothing to do with the issue of
torture and does not affect or change China’s principled
position of firmly opposing and prohibiting torture.
China is seriously concerned that the main sponsors
of the draft resolution are linking trade with human
rights issues. That could be used in future for political
purposes to artificially create barriers to international
trade on account of human rights, thereby having a
negative impact of the free flow of international trade.
The draft resolution also includes capital punishment
in its scope, which has no basis in international law.
As is known, all countries have serious differences on

the issue of the death penalty. Countries should decide
whether to apply the death penalty in line with their
national circumstances and cultural traditions. The
draft resolution disregards the diversity of cultures,
traditions and judicial systems among different
countries in the world by imposing the suspension or
abolition of the death penalty on other countries.
The draft resolution deals with torture, capital
punishment, trade and human rights and their
interrelationships, aiming to establish common
international standards and turn them into international
law. It covers a wide scope with a far-reaching impact.
Member States must be able to study it carefully and
in-depth and build consensus through full consultation.
On the contrary, there have been only three informal
consultations on the draft resolution. While many
countries still have fundamental difficulties with the
draft, the main sponsors are insisting on submitting it to
the General Assembly for consideration. This practice
of imposing their will on others is not constructive.
For those reasons, China will vote against the draft
resolution and hopes that other countries will take the
same position.
Ms. Suzuki (Japan): I would like to explain the
position of the Government of Japan on draft resolution
A/73/L.94.
We find two serious issues in the draft resolution:
first is the reference to the death penalty and the second
the reference to the legitimacy of trade regulations.
Article 2 of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment stipulates State parties’ obligation to
prevent acts of torture in any territory under their
jurisdiction. No exceptional circumstances whatsoever
may be invoked as a justification of torture.
The prevention of torture is well established under
international human rights law. The international
community should act in concert to ensure that such
prevention is implemented. Japan has no objection
to discussing possible measures to prevent torture.
However, there is no universal understanding that the
death penalty constitutes an act of torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It is up
to the national criminal justice system of each Member
State to either abolish or retain the death penalty.
Addressing the death penalty and torture in the
same draft resolution leads to confusion concerning

the two issues. That confusion not only gives rise to
unconstructive friction between Member States but also
makes it difficult to take coordinated action towards
the prevention of torture.
My delegation has constructively engaged in
informal negotiations, offering concrete amendment
proposals on the understanding that the deletion of
references to the death penalty with a strong focus on
the prevention of torture would be a precondition for
the discussion of trade regulations.
Many countries expressed similar concerns
during the negotiations. However, the co-sponsors
did not offer the opportunity for sufficient dialogue
on these important concerns and did not accept the
draft amendments. Under these circumstances, today’s
action on the draft resolution in the General Assembly
is deeply regrettable.
My delegation cannot accept the current text,
which addresses torture and the death penalty in the
same sentence.
For that reason, Japan will vote against the
draft resolution.
Mr. Elshenawy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt would like
to explain its vote before the voting on draft resolution
A/73/L.94, entitled “Towards torture-free trade:
examining the feasibility, scope and parameters for
possible common international standards”.
Egypt stresses its firm belief that the prevention of
torture and other forms of harsh, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment is an inalienable right under
international human rights law and should not be
breached under any circumstances. Furthermore, we
believe that the prevention of torture is an obligatory
norm of international human rights law.
In principle, we support the measures to promote
international cooperation within the United Nations
with a view to prohibiting goods that are used only for
torture. Egypt would have liked to join the consensus
on the draft resolution had it been accurate enough in
dealing with the main objective of the text, that is, to
put an end to trade in goods used for torture.
However, we would like to take this opportunity to
express our reservations on a number of issues related
to the draft resolution and to the manner in which it was
presented to the General Assembly.

First, not enough time was allocated for
discussing the draft resolution, and it was presented
by the co-sponsors directly in the General Assembly,
bypassing the Third Committee and all other relevant
mechanisms, including the Human Rights Council.
This represents a serious precedent in the handling of
human rights issues at the United Nations.
The delegation of Egypt has on more than one
occasion expressed its reservations on the methods
used in the conduct of the negotiations and on the
failure to take the views of a large number of States into
account, in addition to the lack of necessary data on the
controversial issue of the draft resolution, in spite of the
repeated requests made by many countries during the
relevant negotiations.
Secondly, Egypt’s main reservation on the draft
resolution is reflected in its possible impact on
international trade and the possibility of the use of
common international standards to be clarified in
future as obstacles to trade, as well as setting politicized
and non-neutral conditions on certain States based on
alleged claims regarding their human rights records,
thereby preventing certain goods from reaching them.
Thirdly, the draft resolution clearly links torture
and other forms of harsh, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment on the one hand, and capital
punishment on the other. This linkage has been the goal
of many States in the past with a view to calling for the
abolition of capital punishment, based on the text of the
draft resolution regarding the need to put an end to the
trade of goods related to torture or capital punishment,
despite the rejection of this linkage by a large number
of countries.
Egypt emphasizes that article 6 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights gives States
the sovereign right to apply capital punishment for the
most heinous crimes in accordance with their national
jurisdiction and applicable rules.
In view of the aforementioned reservations, Egypt
will vote against the draft resolution and calls upon
other countries to do the same.
Ms. Henry (Jamaica): I take the floor to provide
an explanation of vote with respect to draft resolution
A/73/L.94, entitled “Towards torture-free trade:
examining the feasibility, scope and parameters for
possible common international standards”.

Jamaica will vote against the draft resolution for
the following reasons.
First, we are concerned about the text’s attempts to
conflate issues related to human rights and trade without
the full ventilation of possible implications in the Third
Committee or the World Trade Organization (WTO). It
is noted that the fifth preambular paragraph highlights
the absence of common international standards on
the import, export and transfer of goods for the uses
listed. We maintain that such discussions related to the
formulation of international standards on trade should
be maintained within the purview of the WTO.
Secondly, we are concerned that the draft resolution
could set the stage for the imposition of conditionalities
or trade regulations that restrict the ability of countries
to fully pursue their international trade relations, The
imposition of non-tariff measures on the basis of human
rights concerns will particularly affect countries such
as Jamaica, which operate open economies and are
heavily dependent upon external trade.
Thirdly, the language of the draft resolution does not
take into consideration the fact that there are tradable
items that embody a dual purpose or use. Therefore,
the list of items could be infinite. Establishing the
threshold for proof and identification of such items
would require relevant consultations with military and
security experts.
Jamaica remains fully committed to the principles
set out in the United Nations Charter, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and resolution
72/163. It is noted that resolution 72/163 mandates the
Secretary-General, the Committee against Torture
and the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and
other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and the Special Rapporteur to submit
reports for consideration by the General Assembly
on their activities related to torture and other cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment
during this session and the upcoming session of the
Assembly. Accordingly, my delegation would not wish
to be engaged in a parallel process that may affect
or prejudice the outcomes of the consideration of
those reports.
My delegation is further disappointed that the draft
resolution includes references to capital punishment
and seemingly equates this lawful practice to torture. It
will be recalled that there is currently no international

law prohibiting the use of capital punishment. Jamaica
maintains that it is a sovereign right of every country to
decide its own judicial and political systems, taking into
account the country’s unique history, legal traditions
and national circumstances. In this respect, we are
concerned about the unwarranted attempt to target and
modify national legal instruments governing the use of
capital punishment.
The draft resolution does not reflect the balance
of interests of all Member States. The current draft
does not sufficiently address or take into consideration
the amendments submitted by Member States during
the informal consultations. My delegation is therefore
concerned that critical issues that have been raised and
which require further analysis and discussion were not
given the required attention during the deliberations
on the draft resolution. Moreover, the draft resolution
envisions the establishment of a group of governmental
experts to examine the feasibility and scope of the goods
to be included and draw up parameters for a range of
options to establish common international standards.
My delegation believes that this group of experts is
unlikely to be representative of the widest possible
views on the related issues. We are therefore loathe to
support any draft resolution that may potentially affect
international trade opportunities and our negotiations
conducted under the auspices of the WTO.
On a final note, paragraph 4 calls for the cost of
all activities that may arise from the implementation of
the present draft resolution to be met from voluntary
contributions. It would appear that this draft resolution
has the potential to divert funds from the existing
United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture
and from the Special Fund of the Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture on which a report by the
Secretary-General is anticipated in the seventy-third
and seventy-fourth sessions of the General Assembly.
We would discourage such an approach, which appears
to run counter to our collective commitment to
revitalizing the work of the General Assembly.
Mrs. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is taking the floor in explanation of vote
before the voting on draft resolution A/73/L.94,
entitled “Towards torture-free trade: examining the
feasibility, scope and parameters for possible common
international standards”, under agenda item 74,
“Promotion and protection of human rights”, which is
currently being examined.

First, it must be clarified that the Sudan is against
torture and the inhuman or degrading treatment and
punishment of persons. Nevertheless, linking human
rights issues with international trade issues, especially
torture, still does not enjoy consensus among Member
States. More discussions and study are needed to reach
consensus within the General Assembly. My country’s
delegation therefore believes that the draft resolution
should be further discussed in the Committees of
the General Assembly, which will lead to the desired
consensus and neutral international standards.
Secondly, in several of its paragraphs the draft
resolution addresses capital punishment, which is a
controversial issue that does not yet enjoy consensus
within the Committees of the General Assembly.
This issue contradicts national legislation in many
countries, as well as their cultural and ideological
background. Setting punishments in accordance with
national legislation and laws is a sovereign issue in the
first place, and does not contravene international laws
and treaties. Member States must respect that. In this
regard, my country’s delegation rejects the reference
to capital punishment in the preambular and operative
paragraphs of the draft resolution. In addition, the third
preambular paragraph does not clearly state which
instruments are likely to be used for torture or for
causing harm, which makes exporting, importing and
producing them a difficult and controversial issue.
For all these reasons, my country’s delegation
shares the concerns and reservations of other
delegations and will vote against the draft resolution.
We also request that this statement be included in the
record of this meeting.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States does not take trade-policy direction
from the General Assembly. Further restrictions on the
materials used in capital punishment are inconsistent
with international law, which recognizes the authority
of States to impose the death penalty for the most serious
crimes. The United States is a signatory neither to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment nor to the Second Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
For these reasons, we are opposed to draft resolution
A/73/L.94.
Mr. Situmorang (Indonesia): As a party to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman

or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Indonesia is
committed to the full implementation of the Convention.
Furthermore, Indonesia believes that the international
community should cooperate to fulfil the provisions of
the Convention aimed at preventing and responding to
torture and other ill treatments.
The draft resolution with which we are presented
(A/73/L.94) has an underlying purpose that is not
completely aligned with the Convention. The proponents
seek to end trade in goods used to carry out the death
penalty and torture. This goal is problematic in that it
conflates the death penalty with torture and other ill
treatment, which is an issue of principle. Our national
legislation affirms that the death penalty is a legitimate
form of punishment for the most serious crimes in our
society. It is also justified by international law. It is very
unfortunate that the request by delegations to delete all
references to the death penalty was not accommodated.
We also regret that the proposal to use such inclusive
mechanisms as open-ended working groups was not
accommodated in the draft resolution. The proponent
insisted on the establishment of a group of governmental
experts without a clear mandate, parameters or terms
of reference. Inclusive mechanisms would allow more
experts and Member States to contribute to the process
and increase ownership over the result. We therefore
continue to advocate for the formation of an openended working group.
Turning to the procedural aspects, the way in which
this draft resolution was deliberated seems to confirm
the trend of undermining multilateralism. Consensus
is no longer the norm. The drafting of documents is
merely an exercise in imposition rather than genuine
deliberation. We regret that the draft resolution did not
undergo due process.
First, the three informal consultations, held over
such a short period, were not sufficient to allow for a
meaningful exchange of ideas. Moreover, many of the
questions raised by various delegations, including ours,
were not answered.
Secondly, the strong trade element in the draft
resolution should have been discussed by trade experts
as well. Instead, the consultations were mainly attended
by human rights experts. We argue that this should be
discussed first in Geneva, which hosts both trade and
human rights experts of the United Nations system,
thereby leveraging United Nations expertise.

Thirdly, the draft resolution was not built on the
consensus that is embodied in resolution 72/163, which
we will revisit this year. The resolution already has a
provision to prevent and prohibit the production, trade,
export, import and use of equipment that has no practical
use other than for the purpose of torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Indonesia is ready to support a consensus-based
process. For the reasons I mentioned, we will not support
the draft resolution and will abstain in the voting.
Mr. Balobaid (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to explain its vote on draft
resolution A/73/L.94. We will vote against the draft
resolution for the following reasons.
First, the sponsors of the draft resolution did not
take into account the comments and points of views
made by other parties that have concerns or doubts
about the text of the draft resolution.
Secondly, my country’s delegation fully rejects
the linkage between, on the one hand, the crime of
torture, which has been rejected under all international,
regional and national laws, and, on the other,
punishments, including capital punishment, that are
carried out in accordance with legislative mechanisms
and careful judgments, as well as sovereign laws that
must be respected at all levels. In principle, we reject
the equation of the crime of torture and harsh practices
with national judgments.
Thirdly, the draft resolution is general in nature
and lacks clarity. It does not include any reference to
the tools to be prohibited. The crime of torture can be
carried out with different tools, including very simple
ones. If those tools were listed in the draft resolution,
my delegation would have supported it. My country is
committed to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
which was ratified by the Yemeni Republic in 1991.
Mr. Al-Khaqani (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to provide an explanation of vote
on draft resolution A/73/L.94.
My delegation participated in the consultations
from the very first negotiating meeting. We expressed
our concern about certain sensitive issues, foremost
of which is the linkage in the draft resolution between
torture and capital punishment. We clarified that capital
punishment is a sovereign national issue subject to the
applicable State laws. That is supported by paragraph 1

of resolution 73/175, which acknowledges the sovereign
right of States to implement their national legislation.
Torture is degrading and inhuman and cannot be
accepted under any law, norms and religions.
Moreover, paragraph 1 of the draft resolution
calls on the Secretary-General to establish common
international standards for the import, export and
transfer of goods used for torture. That is a very strange
request because it establishes a serious precedent that
is not compatible with international humanitarian law,
which rejects torture and calls on all States to stop
using that degrading practice.
For those reasons, my country’s delegation will
vote against the draft resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.94, entitled “Towards torture-free
trade: examining the feasibility, scope and parameters
for possible common international standards”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce,
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.94: Colombia, Ecuador, Honduras,
Liechtenstein, Madagascar, Mexico, Panama, Serbia,
Switzerland, Turkey and Uruguay.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cabo Verde, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,

Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan
Against:
Bahamas, Bahrain, China, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Israel, Jamaica, Japan, Myanmar,
Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, United States of America,
Yemen
Abstaining:
Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Cameroon, Comoros,
Djibouti, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritius, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Oman, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam
Draft resolution A/73/L.94 was adopted by 81 votes
to 20, with 44 abstentions (resolution 73/304).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Togo informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote after the voting, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): Resolution 73/304 attempts to establish a link
that does not exist between the prohibition of torture,
which is a peremptory norm under international law,
and the death penalty, which is recognized under
international law as a permissible measure for the most
serious crimes. For that reason, my delegation decided
to vote against resolution 73/304.

Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): My delegation
has asked for the floor to explain Malaysia’s position
on resolution 73/304, entitled “Towards torture-free
trade: examining the feasibility, scope and parameters
for possible common international standards”.
Like most other countries, Malaysia is absolutely
against torture. We are supportive of the principles
behind the resolution. Nevertheless, my delegation
would like to point out a few areas of concern.
First, the approach that was taken in formulating
the resolution does not adhere to the rules of procedure
of the United Nations. Malaysia is of the opinion that
the resolution should have first been taken up by
the respective committees. In addition, the issue of
torture-free trade is more appropriately discussed by
colleagues in Geneva, as the matter concerns both trade
and human rights.
Secondly, the goods that the resolution refers to
have not been clearly defined. That may open a can
of worms, since items used for torture could include
weapons and almost anything that could be used as an
instrument of torture. Therefore, my delegation believes
that the resolution is still ambiguous in terms of what
it is targeting. On that basis, my delegation decided to
abstain in the voting on resolution 73/304. Nevertheless,
Malaysia is willing to engage in discussions to further
improve the resolution in the future.
Mr. Chatha (Pakistan): My delegation is taking the
floor to deliver an explanation of vote after the voting.
Pakistan engaged constructively in the drafting of
resolution 73/304, which was presented by Romania.
Pakistan is firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Torture is an abhorrent practice that violates human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Pakistan, as party
to the Convention against Torture, is firmly committed
to the implementation of all its provisions. Pakistan’s
commitment to prohibiting torture is also guaranteed
under article 42 of Pakistan’s Constitution.
Promoting human rights and preventing torture
is an important component of the global human rights
regime. Resolution 73/304, unfortunately, is not
consistent with the highest international standards that
the international human rights regime has established. It
falls woefully short of requisite human rights standards.
A resolution of the General Assembly on
establishing common international standards on such

a topic requires due deliberation and due process.
Regrettably, neither were deliberations held in a timely,
substantive and transparent manner, nor did the process
of finalizing the resolution take on board concerns
expressed by an array of cross-regional Member
States during consultations. We regret that none of
our concerns and proposals or those of many other
delegations, which we supported, were taken on board
by the facilitators.
The association between trade and human rights is
not a new concept, but it does not command consensus
among Member States. Also, establishing common
international standards for the trade of equipment has
no linkage with preventing torture. That idea lacks
empirical evidence. Using trade agreements to impose
specific values and norms is not the right way to address
human rights issues. On the contrary, theory and the
available evidence suggest that the growth of the free
trade system promotes human rights.
Finally, Pakistan rejects the attempt, through
the resolution, to create a linkage between the death
penalty and torture. The death penalty is ordered as a
result of due process of the law under national criminal
justice systems for the most serious crimes. It is
acceptable under the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. Article 6 of the Covenant clearly
states that a sentence of death may be imposed for only
the most serious crimes in accordance with the law in
force at the time of the commission of the crime and
not contrary to the provisions of the present Covenant.
Furthermore, every country has the sovereign right
under international law to decide its own criminal
justice system based on its international circumstances.
For the reasons I mentioned, Pakistan was unable to
join the consensus on the resolution and voted against
it. Pakistan also disassociates itself from the resolution
and requests the General Assembly to reflect that in
its record.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My
country reaffirms its respect for all human rights as the
inherent and global rights of humankind that preserve
human dignity and safeguard people’s physical and
mental integrity.
My country was one of the first to join the
Convention against Torture, on 16 May 1989. In line
with the Convention, we have adopted effective
legislative, administrative and judicial measures aimed

at preventing torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment.
Resolution 73/304 seeks to put an end to the trade
in goods that could be used for torture. However, the
resolution does not take into account the concerns of
many States and hence consensus was not established.
We abstained in the voting on the resolution for the
following reasons.
First, in its operative part the resolution establishes a
link between torture and capital punishment, which are
two completely different issues when considered from
a legal and objective perspective. Indeed, it contradicts
international conventions and national legislation.
Torture, according to the Convention against Torture, is
“any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether
physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a
person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a
third person information or a confession, punishing
him for an act he or a third person has committed or
is suspected of having committed”.
Capital punishment is carried out in accordance
with national laws in order to deter perpetrators and as
a result of a judgment that condemns them of the most
heinous crimes leading to the death of other human
beings. Such judgments are applicable only in the case
of the most serious crimes.
Secondly, it would appear that the text of the
resolution, especially its title, is aimed at the renunciation
of torture in all its forms. We all agree with that.
However, it obscures the ambiguity of its provisions,
as the resolution identifies a linkage between human
rights, on the one hand, and international trade, on the
other, by seeking to establish international standards
that might be politicized while having serious and longterm repercussions on international trade.
Mrs. Weiss (Israel): Israel voted against resolution
73/304 today, and we wish to explain our vote.
To be clear, the State of Israel wholeheartedly
condemns torture and is a party to the Convention
against Torture and fully committed to its dictates. Our
vote today does not derogate from our commitment in
any way. Our opposition to the resolution arises from
many similar concerns raised by our colleagues. In the
interest of time, I will outline those briefly.
Like our Singaporean colleagues and others, we
are deeply concerned about the potential implications

for trade and the open-ended scope of the resolution,
which could potentially include dual-use items,
particularly in its operative paragraphs. We also have
serious concerns with regard to whether the General
Assembly is the proper forum to discuss these matters,
and we are concerned about precedent-setting. We are
also concerned about the proposed group of experts. At
a very minimum, we would have liked to see a clear
requirement that they possess expertise in both human
rights and international trade.
The State of Israel was actively engaged in the few
informal consultations that were held, and we offered
constructive and concrete proposals to address many
of the concerns that we and others raised today and
in those consultations. We were disappointed that our
suggestions were not adequately reflected in the final
text. Therefore, despite our clear and unwavering
position condemning torture, we could not support
this initiative.
Mrs. Tripathi (India): I take the floor to explain
India’s vote on resolution 73/304.
India remains firmly committed to preventing
torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment or punishment. We firmly believe that freedom
from torture is a human right that must be respected
and protected under all circumstances. Acts of torture
are a punishable offence under various provisions of the
Indian penal code. The Indian judiciary also serves as
a bulwark against any such violations of human rights.
Resolution 73/304, on torture-free, trade seeks to
establish a link between trade in goods and criminal
acts of torture. It is apparent that the multilateral trading
system is already under stress. In such a situation,
attempts at trade restrictions in a selective manner, as
proposed by resolution 73/304, is likely to raise further
concerns about the implications for the international
trading system. Before starting a process of this nature,
the obligations undertaken by different countries and
the World Trade Organization and other forums also
need to be carefully examined. The current process did
not afford any such opportunity to the Member States.
As for resolution 72/163, Member States are going
to give full consideration to the subject matter of torture
at the forthcoming General Assembly session. That also
includes a range of appropriate measures to be taken
to prevent and prohibit the production, trade, export,
import and use of equipment that has no practical use
other than for torture purposes. The current resolution

may start a duplicate parallel process related to goods
used for torture and capital punishment, and therefore
creates ambiguity by conflating different issues.
Every State has the sovereign right to determine
its own legal system and appropriate legal penalties. In
States where capital punishment is statutorily provided
for, it is exercised after following the due process
of law. Torture is a crime, and therefore unlawful.
Incorporating capital punishment into the scope of
resolution 73/304 raises concerns that it may be an
attempt to place it on par with torture. Any implication
that capital punishment is being treated on par with
torture is unacceptable to my delegation, as in India
capital punishment is a statutory provision, even though
it is used in the rarest of rare cases.
In view of the substantive and procedural
inconsistencies, India was unable to support the
resolution 73/304 and abstained in the voting.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): As
everyone knows, Algeria abstained in the voting on
resolution 73/304. We did so for the following reasons.
First, Algeria is a party to most United Nations
conventions on human rights, including the Convention
against Torture. As is well known, torture is an
abhorrent crime that is unacceptable to humankind, and
particularly to the Algerian people, who have suffered
from colonialism, occupation, torture and genocide.
Algeria is therefore one of the first countries to
believe in opposing torture. We want the international
community to be free of this abhorrent crime.
Secondly, I would like to note and emphasize
that the Algerian delegation participated in all the
formal and informal meetings and consultations held
on the resolution. However, the approach taken by
the sponsors cannot be reconciled with the concerns
expressed by various delegations, including those that
have spoken in the Hall today. The sponsors did not
take into consideration the proposals made by various
delegations. A group of experts limited in scope led the
negotiations and consultations, whereas transparency
is one of the main principles of the United Nations;
all parties ought to be able to participate. We would
have preferred an open-ended group instead of a group
of experts.
Thirdly, we cannot agree with the position linking
torture and capital punishment: torture is subject to an
international convention, whereas capital punishment

is subject to the national jurisdiction of States. We
therefore cannot possibly agree with the approach taken
in resolution 73/304.
Finally, we stress that the principles of openness and
transparency must be applied in considering this matter.
Consultations should have included all delegations.
Ms. Nguyen (Viet Nam): As a State party to the
Convention against Torture, Viet Nam reaffirms its
commitment to preventing and countering acts of
torture and has continued to pursue international
cooperation in this regard.
As nations differ in approaches, a genuine spirit of
international cooperation lies in the principle of respect
for sovereign rights and mutual understanding. The
imposition of views of a group of Member States on
others cannot be called cooperation or consultation.
That rings true in the case of resolution 73/304, on
torture-free trade, which covers many complex issues,
such as capital punishment and common international
trade standards. We believe that extensive and thorough
discussion is required for such a resolution, rather
than the mere three informal meetings held during
the past few weeks. It is also regrettable that many
good proposals were presented during the informal
consultations to reflect the diverse views of Member
States and find common ground, but which were not
taken into account. Viet Nam could not therefore
support resolution 73/304 and abstained in the voting.
We would like to highlight the following points.
First, the inclusion of capital punishment in the
resolution is unacceptable. In no way should capital
punishment be linked with torture. Capital punishment
is a criminal justice issue that falls within the sovereign
rights of each country, and its application is restricted
to only the most serious crimes.
Secondly, further clarification is needed with
regard to the scope of the resolution and the definition
of goods in the context thereof. Such goods must not be
understood to include dual-use goods that are used for
the purpose of national security, defence or public order.
Thirdly, on the group of governmental experts that
the resolution aims to create, taking into account the
universal nature of the issue the group will deal with,
we urge that the establishment and work of the group
be undertaken in an inclusive manner and based on
consultation with the United Nations membership.

Last but not least, we had great concern about the
direct submission of this totally new resolution to the
General Assembly plenary without consultation with
such relevant bodies affiliated with the Assembly as
the Third Committee or the Human Rights Council.
Against that backdrop, we would like to refer to
resolution 51/241, entitled “Strengthening of the United
Nations system”.
“[a]s a general rule, agenda items that could
be considered in the Main Committees shall be
referred to the Main Committees rather than the
General Assembly in plenary meetings.”
We therefore call on delegations to follow closely the
working methods we have agreed upon.
Mr. Swai (Myanmar): Myanmar is against any form
of torture and does not condone any such violations.
However, my delegation voted against resolution
73/304 because we have strong reservations on the
establishment of such common international standards
where there is no common position on the issue. We
believe that any attempts to regulate trade by setting
standards on the pretext of human rights will undermine
free trade. We also share serious concerns with other
countries over the lack of transparency in the process
of negotiations on the resolution. The negotiations were
carried out in haste and without allowing sufficient
time for representatives to consult with the relevant
trade bodies or experts.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Mr. Sukhee (Mongolia): A cross-regional group
of States initiated resolution 73/304, which was just
adopted. That is the result of two years of collective
work as part of the Global Alliance for Torture-free
Trade, which brings together over 60 countries from
around the world.
The number of countries committed to abolishing
the death penalty and eliminating torture and inhuman
and degrading treatment has increased significantly
over the past two decades. However, serious challenges
remain. Goods used for torture are still produced and
sold and eventually find their way to buyers around
the world.

The entire 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is centred on respect for human rights
and human dignity. We, the Member States, have the
primary responsibility for upholding human rights.
To that end, the members of the Global Alliance for
Torture-free Trade presented the resolution, which calls
on the United Nations to examine the feasibility, scope
and parameters for possible common international
standards for torture-free trade, bearing in mind the
international consensus that torture is a violation of
human rights and international treaties.
We are of the view that no one should be subjected
to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment. Therefore, as an initiator and
a member of the Global Alliance for Torture-free Trade,
we supported this important initiative.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): We thank all colleagues for
voting in favour of this new step towards torture-free
trade. Resolution 73/304 is about encouraging reflection,
debate and the sharing of perspectives and experiences.
It was drafted in a balanced and transparent manner.
We think this is an important step on which we can
build further work with regard to establishing common
international standards for torture-free trade.
Mr. Yardley (Australia): Australia is a member
of the cross-regional Global Alliance for Torture-free
Trade and strongly supported resolution 73/304.
Trade in goods that can be used only for torture
and other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or
punishment has been a long-standing concern at the
United Nations. Over 30 years ago, the first Special
Rapporteur on torture, appointed by the Commission on
Human Rights, addressed the issue in an early report.
Several resolutions have called for action in this field,
most recently resolution 72/163, on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
which was adopted without a vote.
Regional organizations, such as the African
Union Commission and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, have recognized the
seriousness of the torture trade and recommended
action. One hundred and sixty-six States have ratified
the Convention against Torture, and have thereby
pledged to take effective legislative, administrative,
judicial or other measures to prevent acts of torture in
any territory under their jurisdiction. Taking steps to
address the trade in torture goods is a critical way by
which such prevention can be assured.

The approach proposed in resolution 73/304 is
intended first and foremost to solicit the views of
all Member States as to how common international
standards might be formulated in future. The views of
all Member States will form the basis for the report of
the Secretary-General, which will then be considered
by a group of governmental experts chosen on the basis
of equitable geographical distribution. We do not assert,
and neither does the resolution, that the imposition of
the death penalty per se amounts to torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Neither
do we assert, and nor does the resolution, that the death
penalty is prohibited per se under international law.
The resolution requests that the group of
governmental experts consider, among other things,
the scope of goods to be covered by any common
international standards. That is because certain goods
that are traded, including portable gas chambers, can
be used in ways that inflict undue suffering.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
believe that resolution 73/304, which the Republic
of Argentina co-sponsored, was not intended to urge
States to adjust or modify their domestic legislation,
in particular their criminal justice systems. On
the contrary, the resolution invites States to share
their points of view and contributions in order to
establish common standards on the trade in items
used for the death penalty through a transparent and
inclusive process.
Moreover, in addition to what is indicated in the
text, we are in no way pre-empting the results that
might emerge from the report of the Secretary-General
or the analysis of the group of experts in terms of the
trade in goods used for the death penalty.
We underscore the fact that the text also makes
a distinction by referring to goods used for the death
penalty, on the one hand, and goods used for torture
or other cruel or inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, on the other, bearing in mind the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations that
apply in this context and international human rights law.
For Argentina, the adoption of the resolution is a
crucial step forward in the international community’s
efforts to move forward in developing standards that
will better protect human rights.
Ms. Vieira (Cabo Verde): Cabo Verde welcomes
the adoption of resolution 73/304. The resolution is an

example of the best the United Nations can do to better
promote and protect human rights for all.
Torture is universally recognized as a serious
crime, and is therefore prohibited under international
law. As a State party to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and its Second Optional
Protocol and the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
and its Optional Protocol, Cabo Verde seizes this
opportunity to once again confidently reaffirm that no
one shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment.
The provisions set forth in this resolution are ways
to conduct a fair analysis on feasibility and allow for an
accurate reflection of the scope of the range of options
for establishing common international standards
for the import, export and transfer of goods used for
capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment. By doing so,
we will be able to set the parameters for achieving
torture-free trade.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 74.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I should like to draw the
attention of the General Assembly to draft resolution
A/73/L.88, which has been distributed in connection
with sub-item (b) of agenda item 74, entitled “Human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 74 at its 61st plenary meeting, on 19 December
2018. In order for the Assembly to take action on the
draft resolution before it, it will be necessary to re-open
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 74.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to re-open its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 74?

It was so decided (decision 73/504 B).
Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Draft resolution (A/73/L.88)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Afghanistan to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.88.
Mr. Rasuli (Afghanistan): On behalf of
Afghanistan and all the other sponsors, under sub-item
(b) of agenda item 74, I am pleased to introduce for
action by the General Assembly the draft resolution
entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation to
assist victims of terrorism”.
Allow me to convey our sincere gratitude to all
Member States for the constructive engagement that
characterized the negotiations on the draft resolution
during the informal consultations. The highly engaged
participation by Member States during the consultations
and the quality of the debates in a cooperative atmosphere
are a testimony to the importance of this issue.
Terrorism and violent extremism continue to
undermine our shared values of peace, security, human
rights for all and the rule of law. These evil phenomena
are also direct threats to our sustainable growth
and development.
Despite all of our efforts, the toll of terrorism is on
the rise. Countless people around the world have been
killed, suffered injuries, lost loved ones, or witnessed
the destruction of their properties and livelihoods. Most
of the time, victims of terrorism are forgotten shortly
after the incident, left to address their trauma and pick
up the shattered pieces of their lives by themselves.
We believe that victims of terrorism deserve more
international attention — their voices must be heard,
their rights protected and their needs addressed. The
current draft resolution was conceived to address
that reality.
The draft resolution aims to further strengthen
national and international mechanisms to support
victims of terrorism and their families and to ensure that
their human rights and fundamental freedoms are fully

respected. The text condemns all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
It expresses the unwavering commitment of the
international community to strengthen cooperation to
prevent and combat terrorism, address impunity and
pursue accountability for the perpetrators of terrorist
acts and their supporters.
Furthermore, the draft resolution calls upon Member
States to develop their comprehensive assistance plans
for victims of terrorism in order to address the needs of
victims of terrorism and their families, and requests the
relevant United Nations entities to assist Member States
in developing such plans and aid in their capacitybuilding.
Finally, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit a report containing an evaluation
of the existing United Nations activities on victims of
terrorism, with a focus on concrete recommendations
for a voluntarily funded comprehensive programme
to support Member States in assisting the victims of
terrorism through national mechanisms.
In conclusion, by adopting this draft resolution
today, this organ will demonstrate its unwavering
commitment to, and solidarity with, victims of terrorism
and their survivors. It is my sincere hope that the
General Assembly will adopt it by consensus. I would
like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude to
all Member States that have supported and sponsored
the draft resolution. I also invite those who have not yet
sponsored it to support this important initiative.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.88.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like
to express its deep thanks and appreciation to the
representatives of the permanent delegation of the
friendly Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the
transparent and balanced process they carried out
successfully and in a professional manner, which led to
today’s draft resolution A/73/L.88.
My country, Syria, will join the consensus on the
draft resolution. We participated in the negotiations
and consultations in a most positive and constructive

spirit. We wanted a draft resolution that, as much
as possible, would achieve the noble objectives of
promoting international cooperation to assist the
victims of terrorism.
However, the path to achieving such important
objectives is often routinely blocked by obstacles
resulting from political considerations that are related
to the interests of States or regional and geographic
groups. In that regard, my delegation would like to
explain its firm position with regard to the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
We shall continue to call for the reform of the
Centre’s system and its working methods in order
to ensure the implementation of the principles of
transparency, participation and governance. At the
same time, the Syrian Arab Republic will continue
to disassociate itself from the activities of the Centre
because we believe that it works in a way that runs
counter to the United Nations principles of transparency,
neutrality and inclusiveness.
With regard to the substance of the draft resolution,
as a country that is primarily concerned with combating
terrorism, the Syrian Arab Republic welcomes any
references to protecting the rights of the victims of
crimes perpetrated by armed terrorist groups, which
primarily target civilians, leading to the killing of
thousands and the injury of thousands more on pretexts
that have no basis in fact or reality. Such acts also target
public and private property and infrastructure, leading
to the displacement of millions and threatening the
stability of States and societies, as well as the security
of their citizens.
In parallel, my delegation stresses that the
prosecution and ensuring of accountability for the
perpetrators of terrorist acts and crimes must take
place within a national framework that respects
national ownership and characteristics, as well as the
laws and Constitutions of States, through national
legal institutions.
The Syrian Arab Republic therefore welcomes the
reference in the draft resolution in that respect. We also
stress that sharing information and expertise among
Member States must be based on the principle of mutual
respect for national sovereignty and that providing
United Nations technical assistance to Member States
must be based on requests from the Governments
of States.

In its war against terrorism against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and
other terrorist groups, the Syrian Arab Republic has lost
tens of thousands of its sons and daughters. The Syrian
people have experienced unprecedented suffering
because of terrorism, in addition to terrible economic
losses that no State in the world can bear alone.
However, to date my country has received no
technical or concrete financial support from the United
Nations in combating terrorism. In fact, it is subject
to an unprecedented economic siege, imposed by the
Governments of States that have either participated in
financing that terrorism or have turned a blind eye to it
and its supporters and financers.
We still believe that there are many international
responsibilities towards the victims of terrorism in
Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and any other parts of
the world that face terrorism. Those responsibilities
should be borne by Member States and the United
Nations in a collective manner. They are fundamentally
linked to the need to implement the relevant Security
Council counter-terrorism resolutions so as to
eradicate terrorism as a very dangerous international
phenomenon that threatens international peace and
security and leads to countless victims. We now bear
the responsibility for compensating and rehabilitating
those victims.
Let me say very frankly that we are here today to
deal with the consequences of terrorist acts because
some Governments did not commit to combating
terrorism in a non-politicized way without double
standards — States that did not respect the Security
Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII, which
prohibit and criminalize the financing and arming
of supporters of armed terrorist groups. They have
breached those resolutions and have participated
directly in the spread of the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.
Let me conclude by stressing that my country, Syria,
joins the consensus on the draft resolution and supports
all international efforts that respect the national
sovereignty of States, since national Governments are
the true partner in combating terrorism and in protecting
the rights of victims of terrorism. However, we will
always emphasize that we owe the victims of terrorism
everywhere on Earth a large debt and that the protection
of the rights of victims of terrorism starts with dealing

with the real root causes and grounds that led to the
spread of terrorism as an international phenomenon.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.88, entitled “Enhancement of
international cooperation to assist victims of terrorism”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.88, and in addition to those delegations
listed therein, the following countries have become
co-sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom, the United States
of America, Uzbekistan and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take I that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.88?
Draft resolution A/73/L.88
(resolution 73/305).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Shabaltas (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to take this
opportunity to thank the delegation of Afghanistan
for its initiative to prepare resolution 73/305, entitled

“Enhancement of international cooperation to assist
victims of terrorism”.

appropriate system of assistance and protection that
meets their genuine needs.

We are pleased to note that the result of such efforts
was a consensus document that will be an important
addition to the broad range of measures to combat
terrorism under the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We would like to stress in particular
the importance of the resolution’s provisions concerning
access for victims to the justice system and respect for
their rights in legal cases, as well as the paragraphs
pertaining to the improvement of criminal measures
to punish terrorists and to cooperation between the
relevant entities tasked with that role.

The Group of Friends of the Victims of Terrorism
was formed just this week. We, along with Afghanistan,
will chair the Group. We hope to be able to work to
promote the agenda of the victims of terrorism here
at the United Nations. Furthermore, Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov recently announced a
global conference that will bring together the victims of
terrorism in June next year. We appreciate that initiative,
view it as a positive sign and will participate fully.

However, due to the thematic scope of resolution
73/305, some fundamental aspects had to be omitted. In
its implementation, there is the need to consider that the
imperative of combating terrorism should be punishing
those participating in terrorist activities. Therefore,
we call on all States to honour their international
commitments and assume their responsibilities in
accordance with the principle of aut dedere aut
judicare, outlined in the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. It is also important to improve the mutual
legal assistance and extradition mechanisms, thereby
bolstering cooperation among the bodies tasked with
those issues.
We believe that political will to cooperate on
law enforcement is one of the most crucial factors in
decreasing the number of terrorist acts and in ensuring
the legal rights of the victims of such crimes.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
resolution 73/305.
I give the floor to the representative of Spain.
Mrs. Palacios Palacios (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We are pleased to be here for the adoption by consensus
of resolution 73/305, on enhancing international
cooperation to assist victims of terrorism.
First of all, we would like to thank Afghanistan
for this initiative and for the efforts it made in recent
years in support of victims. For years, Spain has called
for the primacy of the role of victims in combating
terrorism and stressed the ethical and moral need to
fully recognize them and their rights and to build an

The resolution just adopted calls upon Member
States to develop comprehensive assistance plans for
the victims of terrorism that address their immediate
and short- and long-term needs. Resolution 73/305
also encourages States to share good practices in that
area. Spain, which has an advanced and comprehensive
system to protect and recognize the victims of terrorism,
would like to demonstrate its readiness to share its
experience within the framework of the resolution.
We know that several victims of terrorism
throughout the world still lack the protection and
recognition they deserve. We intend to continue
working to change that situation. With the adoption
of resolution 73/305, on which we again congratulate
Afghanistan, we are optimistic and hopeful that we are
finally moving in the right direction.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item. The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 74.
Agenda item 168 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/898)
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): My delegation
would like to thank the President for convening
today’s meeting.
We would also like to welcome Ms. Karen Smith
and congratulate her on appointment as Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect (R2P). We wish her every success in her
new role. Furthermore, we thank Mr. Adama Dieng,

Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, for the
important role his office continues to play.
We also welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsibility to protect (A/73/898).
We would like to highlight the following five points in
our statement: the importance of prevention, the role
of regional organizations, the women and peace and
security agenda, the protection of civilians and the of
importance of guarantees of non-recurrence.
First, with regard to prevention, South Africa
strongly agrees that the prevention of atrocities is
central to the successful implementation of R2P. We
therefore continue to advocate for a sharper focus on
the wide range of tools available to us with regard to
enhanced diplomacy and multilateralism. R2P must, as
its central interest, promote the safety and well-being
of the affected populations and should never be used
to advance the narrow self-interests of those who seek
intervention. Therefore, any Security Council mandate
imposing R2P must be clearly defined and implemented
in the letter and spirit of its provisions. Most important,
it must respect the Charter of the United Nations.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome document states
that the application of the responsibility to protect is
strictly limited to genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. As such, the application
of the concept should be narrow and restricted to those
four identified crimes, while utilizing all the tools
of conflict prevention and resolution available to the
United Nations.
Based on South Africa’s experiences of Security
Council resolutions 1973 (2011), concerning Libya,
and 1975 (2011), concerning Cote d’Ivoire, we are
opposed to any open-ended authorization of the use
of force with no accountability, which has led to
regime-change expeditions. Domestic interference
in the internal affairs of Member States should
not be disguised as applying the principles of the
responsibility to protect. When that principle is abused,
it can lead to catastrophic consequences that can result
in the displacement of people, unprecedented migration
and other humanitarian challenges. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report states, the need to strengthen the rule
of law for atrocity prevention is important.
The report further calls for action in three main
areas, namely, access to justice, effective and legitimate
security forces, and transparent and accountable
governance. We believe accountability is vital in terms

of justice for victims and the fight against impunity.
However, accountability should never be a substitute for
genuine prevention efforts. Furthermore, South Africa,
as the co-Chair of the Group of Friends on Security
Sector Reform, will continue to use that platform
to promote and prioritize negotiations and the use of
good offices, mediation, arbitration and other peaceful
means to address any challenges faced by countries
affected by conflict.
Secondly, the role of regional organizations in
conflict prevention cannot be overemphasized. Article
4 of the Constitutive Act of the African Union (AU)
establishes the right of the AU to intervene in the
affairs of a member State to prevent grave violations
of human rights. However, that should be activated
only once all other efforts to mediate the conflict
have been exhausted. It is broadly agreed that the
principle of prevention is more effective than the use
of force in reacting to conflicts, and in that regard, the
African Union Commission operationalized the AU
Mediation Support Unit (MSU) in mid-March 2019.
The AU Commission has devoted efforts towards the
strengthening of the MSU, including though capacitybuilding on mediation as well as the mainstreaming
of gender in mediation. That has strengthened the
AU capacity to address conflicts on the continent
in order to avoid costly interventions, which often
lead to the loss of life. The international community
should help build the capacity of Member States and
regional organizations in addressing conflict hot spots
through mediation before activating the principle of the
responsibility to protect. In that regard, we agree with
the Secretary-General’s report with regard to providing
support to national authorities in strengthening their
capacity to prevent atrocity crimes.
Thirdly, with regard to the women and peace and
security agenda, as the twentieth anniversary of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) approaches, we continue
to call for women’s full participation in political and
economic systems to help in addressing the root causes
of conflict. Women’s perspectives and experiences are
important for early warning that can prevent conflict
and its resurgence. As the Secretary-General’s report
points out, women’s economic empowerment also
contributes positive elements to securing livelihoods
and there is a need to further connect the atrocity
prevention agenda with other global commitments and
priorities, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, especially Sustainable Development

Goal (SDG) 16, on women and peace and security, and
international peace and security.
Fourthly, with regard to the protection of civilians,
it is important for the United Nations to periodically
evaluate its response to the protection of civilians
because protecting civilians from the scourge of
conflict is at the core of maintaining international
peace and security. If the United Nations is not seen
to be protecting civilians and if innocent children,
women and men continue to suffer on our watch, we
will have failed the mandate entrusted to us. South
Africa is as such fully committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and continues to support
a strengthened normative and legal framework for
enhancing such protection.
Moreover, the Security Council would do well
to consider the advice by the Secretary-General that
preventative action is built on trust, transparency
and accountability. The Security Council should
therefore reconsider the manner in which it executes
its mandate and addresses threats to, and breaches
of, international peace and security. Furthermore, it
should increase its engagement with Member States,
especially those affected by conflict and that are open
to effective engagement with regional and subregional
organizations. Most United Nations peacekeeping
missions include a mandate to protect civilians, and
that should be strengthened to ensure that conflictrelated sexual violence and activities in support of
the disarmament and demobilization of armed groups
are addressed.
We wish to underline that it remains the primary
responsibility of States to protect civilians within
their borders. Armed opposition groups also bear the
responsibility of ensuring that unarmed civilians are
protected. A failure by both State and non-State actors
to uphold that principle should not go unpunished.
Accountability must first and foremost be sought at the
national level. Failing that, the international community
has a collective responsibility to act in accordance with
international humanitarian law, using mechanisms
at its disposal, including independent fact-finding
commissions and commissions of inquiry.
Fifthly, with regard to the importance of guarantees
of non-recurrence, it is important to ensure that those
countries that have experienced such atrocities never
experience them again. National accountability efforts
are also important and among the most effective

ways of preventing the recurrence of atrocity crimes,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report.
Guarantees of non-recurrence of mass atrocity crimes
are embedded within United Nations resolutions
and declarations on peacebuilding and sustainable
development, particularly SDG 16, which links social
integration, justice and sustainable peace. It is important
to ensure that we address economic inequalities, which
are often the cause of social tensions when certain
groups in society feel marginalized.
In conclusion, South Africa reaffirms its full
support for the mandates of the Special Advisers on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to
Protect and encourages Member States to do the same.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me
begin by reaffirming Iran’s unwavering commitment
to the noble goal of the protection of civilians and the
prevention of atrocity crimes. We are party to the 1948
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and fully respect our obligations
arising from the Convention, namely, the duties to
prevent and punish the crime of genocide. We have also
expressed on previous occasions our understanding of
the responsibility to protect (R2P), as enshrined in the
2005 World Summit Outcome. In that connection, I
would like to underline a few points.
The primary responsibility to prevent the
commission of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity lies with sovereign States.
Other States or the international community at large
may step in to help, upon request on a case by case
basis and through the United Nations, to prevent such
horrendous atrocities. In limited cases where the use
of force is required to save the population, R2P falls
within the collective security framework of the United
Nations and can be authorized only by the Security
Council in full compliance with international law and
only as a last resort.
We also took note of some recommendations to
further develop, conceptualize and operationalize
the R2P concept. However, it is premature to discuss
those recommendations, since we are still far from a
consensual understanding of R2P. At the same time,
it seems that there are some attempts to introduce
alternatives to the central role of the United Nations
in this process, such as putting forward the concept of
international leadership of a State, or group of States, to
provide preventive action. Such recommendations give

rise to serious concerns for many countries and could be
easily manipulated, particularly at a time when R2P has
failed the test of objectivity, as well as impartiality, and
is guided by the politicized interests of certain States,
rather than human dignity and rights, and therefore
has been far removed from its alleged objectives and
purposes. In that regard , we reiterate our call that,
prior to the implementation of R2P, it is crucial to
define its normative content and objectives, as well as
its scope of application. Effort in that regard should be
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and
well-established principles of international law.
The prevention of mass atrocity crimes should
remain the core objective of R2P. That, by no means
whatsoever, may be inferred as permitting the use
force against another State under any pretext, such as
humanitarian intervention, which may pave the way
for all manner of politically motivated interventions
in other countries. The objective of R2P should not be
defined as regime change or interference in the internal
affairs of countries.
Prevention should be seen as a long-term strategy,
be interpreted in broad terms and mainly include
non-coercive measures. In that context, R2P should
be seen as a framework to address the root causes
of conflicts and assist vulnerable and failed States
to develop their capacity to protect their populations
and build safer societies. Prevention involves a broad
range of issues from the promotion of sustainable
development, education and health to the eradication of
poverty, marginalization and discrimination.
In addition to efforts to increase the resilience of
societies by addressing the root causes of conflicts
through capacity-building, Member States should stop
selling arms to volatile regions. The conduct of arms
exporters among proponents of R2P raises profound
scepticism with regard to their seriousness and honesty
concerning the noble objective of the protection of
civilians. The question arises as to how those countries
are fulfilling their obligations vis-à-vis the protection
of the population while simultaneously selling arms
with the prior knowledge or experience that those arms
will eventually end up being used to target innocent
civilians and will ultimately lead to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
It is unfortunate that civilian populations have
been attacked in recent years, in their homes, schools,
hospitals and even in public ceremonies, such as

funerals and weddings. The devastating experiences
of the past decade in the Middle East and Africa,
which have highly contributed to the regeneration
and expansion of terrorism and extremism in affected
countries and the world as a whole, expose the
consequences of irresponsible protection. Irresponsible
military interventions have created a breeding ground
for those menaces to thrive.
Last but not least, the only way to restore R2P
and its legitimacy is to end the selectivity and double
standards, as well as genuinely address the plight of
humankind, whenever the latter faces atrocity crimes,
in full conformity with the principles and objectives of
the Charter. We should draw lessons from the tragic
and horrible Rwanda genocide, define humanity and
human dignity as the only driver of R2P and put aside
political interests and considerations. Addressing the
misery of people under foreign occupation is the most
immediate test for R2P.
In conclusion, notwithstanding the formal
discussions that have taken place in the General
Assembly, we are still far from a consensual
understanding of the R2P implementation. The
formal discussion in the General Assembly is not an
appropriate format to address existing conceptual
differences among Member States. We reiterate our
call that reverting to informal interactive dialogue, as
agreed in 2009, could be more beneficial in achieving
consensus on this controversial concept.
Mr. Mikeladze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the Permanent Observer
of the European Union yesterday (see A/73/PV.93). I
wish to make a few remarks in my national capacity.
My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/73/898) entitled “Responsibility to
protect: lessons learned for prevention”, and welcomes
the appointment of Ms. Karen Smith as the Special
Adviser of Secretary-General on the Responsibility to
Protect (R2P).
Georgia has been continuously supporting the
principle of the responsibility to protect and welcomes
the opportunity for a formal debate on this important
item at the General Assembly once again this year. As
the world continues to witness conflicts, the abuse of
human rights, ethnic cleansing and forced displacement
in almost every corner of the world, it is high time for
all of us to reinvigorate our common endeavour against

those challenges across all three pillars of the notion
of R2P.
The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is
for good men to do nothing. For that very reason, the
Secretary-General in his report calls for more efforts
by all of us,
“to translate early warning of atrocity crimes
into decisive early action towards prevention”.
(A/73/898, para. 31)
Georgia — a country with its own bitter
experience — suffered several waves of ethnic
cleansing owing to the foreign military occupation, and
is no stranger to having undergone the toll of forced
displacement for more than two decades so far. Against
that background, we fully understand the importance
of strong and proactive preventive tools to avert the
outbreak and protraction of crises, which target civilians
most of all. Georgia is committed to advance its relevant
national mechanisms, be it through the ratification of
the core instruments of international human rights and
humanitarian law or putting in place national human
rights institutions to address atrocity prevention.
Essentially, the criminal code of Georgia entails a
separate section on offences against humankind, which
includes responsibility for crimes against humanity,
peace and security, and international humanitarian law.
We also make our contribution under pillar II of R2P
by sharing our experience in building corruption-free,
effective, accountable and transparent institutions, as
envisaged by Sustainable Development Goal 16, and
strengthening the principles of open governance.
The report of the Secretary-General rightly notes,
“There is a growing gap between [our] words of
commitment and the experience of protecting
vulnerable populations around the world”. (ibid.,
para. 7)
In that context, let me recall the dire situation of people
living on the other side of the occupation line in the
two Georgian regions of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali/
South Ossetia region. Despite numerous calls from the
international community, including the latest Human
Rights Council resolution on Georgia, both occupied
regions remain closed to international human rights
bodies, including the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Sadly, the
people on the ground face grave violations of freedom
of movement, restrictions on education in their native

language, the deprivation of property rights and unlawful
detentions, among many more. This situation creates
an acute risk that could potentially lead to atrocity
crimes and therefore requires greater international
attention. The responsibility of Member States to assist
is of paramount importance in this regard, especially
when we address cases in which a sovereign State is
prevented from exercising its responsibility owing to
foreign military occupation.
It is imperative that the Security Council be able
to act in a timely and efficient manner, exercising its
critical role in the prevention of mass atrocities. In this
context, we reiterate our full support for the FrenchMexican initiative on voluntary veto-right restriction
to prevent such crimes and for the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct.
This year, as we mark the seventieth anniversary of
the adoption of the 1949 Geneva Conventions, the time
is ripe to reflect on the challenges facing us, take stock
of the achievements made and unite in action to uphold
the notion of “never again”.
Finally, let me reiterate Georgia’s commitment to
advancing the goals and objectives of the responsibility
to protect and to support the Secretary-General in his
endeavour to integrate atrocity prevention into the
United Nations prevention platform.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation takes note of the most recent report of
the Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect
(A/73/898). Cuba reiterates that the issue it addresses
remains a source of grave concern for many countries,
in particular small and developing States, owing to the
lack of consensus on and clear definitions of various
elements of this concept, which has been and could
continue to be easily manipulated for political ends.
It would be a mistake to talk about the principle
of the responsibility to protect. This responsibility,
rather, is a concept that is not by any means a principle
of international law. Its characteristics, the rules for its
implementation and the mechanisms for its assessment
are far from having been defined and agreed upon.
In that respect, it would be inappropriate to speak
of the strengthening of the implementation of the
responsibility to protect in the absence of consensus
on its scope, purposes and implications that would
lead to agreement on issues relating to differences
in its interpretation, ensure its universal recognition

and acceptance, and lend legitimacy to the measures
proposed for its implementation.
The
international
understanding
on
the
responsibility to protect is limited simply to paragraphs
138 and 139 of resolution 60/1, only for cases of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. The duty of the international
community lies, as appropriate, in encouraging and
assisting States to exercise that responsibility.
The term “atrocity crimes” does not form part of
this understanding, and therefore it should not be used
in connection with the four premises mentioned in
paragraphs 138 and 139, in addition to being legally
inappropriate and totally ambiguous in terms of giving
substance to such a controversial concept.
Cuba is deeply concerned by terms such as
“atrocity crimes” and “mass atrocities”, which are very
ambiguous and can be used in selective ways and for
political ends to refer to various situations, given the
lack of clarity and agreement regarding the United
Nations mechanisms and bodies that are would be
charged with defining and interpreting the concept.
In the unipolar world that some are attempting to
impose on us and in which political and media-related
manipulation is being carried out by major axes of
power, it is vital to clearly define who decides when
protection is necessary; who decides when a State is
not protecting its people; who, and based on which
criteria, decides what action to take; and how we can
prevent this issue from being used for the purposes
of intervention. Nor is it clear how to ensure that the
option of taking action is exercised with the agreement
of the State affected, so as to avoid the concept being
used as a justification for a supposed and non-existent
right to intervene.
The international efforts under way to prevent
the occurrence of acts of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, goals that Cuba
has always shared and supported, must contribute
to strengthening the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
in particular when it comes to sovereign equality,
territorial integrity and self-determination.
Nonetheless, the ambiguous nature of this concept
and the implications of the implementation of its
so-called three pillars run counter to the purpose
and principles of the Charter. Therefore, we need

to recognize the pre-eminence of the principles of
voluntary action, prior consent and the consent of all
States in the context of the responsibility to protect.
If the goal is prevention, what we should do is
address the root causes of such situations, including
underdevelopment and poverty, the inequitable
international order, inequality and social exclusion,
hunger and marginalization, food insecurity and the
lack of access to drinking water, and the structural
problems that allow conflicts to escalate into extreme
situations, inter alia, which, regrettably, are not taken
into account by many advocates of this concept. We
believe that dealing with these issues would represent
genuine acts of prevention.
Finally, Cuba firmly supports any endeavour that
would ensure that the international community does
not turn a blind eye to genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing or crimes against humanity. However, in
many cases promoting the responsibility to protect is an
excuse to have yet another tool to facilitate interference
in domestic affairs, regime-change agendas and
subversion in third countries, the majority of which
are small and developing countries, to the detriment of
their sovereignty. Unfortunately, world history already
has a wealth of sad examples that justify our concerns.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to express my gratitude for the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General (A/73/898), which
details the lessons learnt with respect to a key aspect of
the responsibility to protect: prevention.
As stated in the report, States must facilitate
the prevention of atrocity crimes by focusing on the
following crucial areas: the importance of accountability
and the rule of law, the central role of civil society in
representing a multitude of diverse perspectives, and the
existence of guarantees of non-recurrence, inter alia.
Argentina deems useful the analysis conducted
by the Secretary-General and believes that all States,
as equal and sovereign States, have reciprocal rights
and responsibilities and that all should be equally
committed to the protection of their peoples against
atrocity crimes, through respect for international law,
in particular respect for humanitarian law, human
rights norms and refugee rights law, as well as the fight
against impunity.
We therefore believe that prevention is the most
important dimension in protecting peoples from

atrocity crimes. We share the importance that the
Secretary-General attaches to this dimension of the
responsibility to protect by encouraging States to
conduct national risk and resilience assessments with a
gender perspective, as part of other existing processes,
such as the Universal Periodic Review.
We also value the lessons learned that were
indicated in the report, which underscores the need
for concerted action by States at the national level to
prevent of atrocity crimes, as well as the need for the
international community to remain united as we aim to
prioritize prevention as an essential focal point.
Moreover, it is vital that we value the participation
of other stakeholders, such as civil society and regional
and subregional organizations, in conflict prevention
and resolution efforts. We also deem it necessary to
step up our efforts to empower women as agents in the
prevention of atrocity crimes.
It is imperative to bolster accountability when it
comes to those responsible for atrocity crimes. The
ratification of the Rome Statute and its amendments
is vital in order to protect populations, given it
contribution to the fight against impunity and its role
as a deterrent mechanism. We also invite all Member
States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration, which
has already been signed by 91 States.
Argentina supports the initiatives of the United
Nations system, such as the responsibility to protect,
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding efforts, the
promotion of the rule of law and the Human Rights
Up Front initiative, among others. We would also like
to highlight the contribution of the Global Network of
Responsibility to Protect Focal Points as an essential
tool to build individual and collective capacities to
prevent mass atrocities.
I would like to express our support for the work of the
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility
to Protect. We also welcome the new Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect, Ms. Karen Smith,
and reiterate the willingness of Argentina to work
constructively with her Office.
Mr. Fintakpa Lamega (Togo) (spoke in French):
We thank the President of the General Assembly for
organizing this debate on a most important item
on the agenda of the seventy-third session, namely,
the responsibility to protect and the prevention of

genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
Togo takes note of report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/898) in this debate, entitled “Responsibility
to protect: lessons learned for prevention”. As the
Secretary-General quite rightly highlights in the report,
at the 2005 World Summit, Member States agreed
that it was incumbent upon every State to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. Progress has certainly
been made since then in terms of conceptualizing and
implementing the responsibility to protect. However,
in the face of a worrisome decline in international
commitment to multilateralism, it remains imperative
to continue advancing the implementation of the
responsibility to protect.
In his report, the Secretary-General also invites
Member States to focus their efforts on diversity, which
they must manage as a force in order to strengthen
the principle of accountability and the rule of law
and to improve access to sustainable livelihoods. For
its part, the Government of Togo adopted a national
development plan for the period 2018 to 2022, thereby
making a significant investment in human capital. It
will ensure that the people of Togo are put first, both
in terms of having their say and benefiting from the
country’s development. This ambitious plan, which
is being implemented as we speak, places special
emphasis on vocational training in order to improve
economic productivity, accelerate youth employment
and reduce social inequalities.
Social protection is also key in order to gradually
broaden inclusion to reach all segments of the
population and bolster the contribution of the social
sector to wealth creation. There are also ongoing efforts
to improve the quality of, and access to, basic social
services, including education, health care, nutrition,
energy services, water and sanitation. The lessons
learned from Togolese history have allowed our highest
authorities to identify the priority areas in which the
State must focus on capacity-building, so as to fulfil its
responsibility to protect the people of Togo.
Over the past year, Togo has made tremendous
efforts to improve security, thanks to numerous
reforms and actions undertaken in this sphere, in
particular strengthening the capacities of our defence
and security forces, the fight against the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons and the establishment

of a digital border control system. Civil protection is
also a priority for my Government. Therefore, in 2017,
Togo established a national civil protection agency and
four emergency fire rescue units, in Lomé and other
regional cities.
With regard to justice, the Government is concerned
with ensuring that the Togolese justice system is fair,
efficient, independent and accessible to all. Bearing that
in mind, we have developed initiatives to support the
modernization project for the justice system, improve
judges’ working conditions and bring justice closer to
the people.
Human rights are a matter of particular importance
for my country’s authorities. Therefore, among the key
reforms undertaken to promote and protect civil and
political rights, as well as the economic, social and
cultural rights of citizens, include Togo’s ratification of
almost all the relevant treaties and instruments. I refer
in particular to the establishment of the Truth, Justice
and Reconciliation Commission of Togo in 2009,
which was tasked with providing recommendations
to the Government on appropriate punishment for the
perpetrators of the violations committed throughout the
country’s history, as well as measures to be taken to
prevent such acts of violence reoccurring.
In 2016, a vote was taken to establish a law on the
organization and functions of a national human rights
commission, which now acts as a mechanism to prevent
and combat torture. The same year also saw a vote
on a law on the status of refugees in Togo in order to
bridge any gaps in the evolution of refugee-protection
norms, which established an appeals mechanism and
provided for measures to be taken in case of a mass
arrival of asylum seekers on national territory. We
also created the Office of the High Commissioner for
Reconciliation and Strengthening of National Unity,
appointed a national mediator and reformed our armed
forces, police and intelligence services.
Although it faces many constraints and challenges
in implementing its responsibility to protect, Togo will
continue its efforts in the priority areas I mentioned,
as well as many others. I wish to take this opportunity
to acknowledge and commend the valuable support
Togo has received to this end from all of its bilateral
and multilateral partners, including the United
Nations system.
In conclusion, Togo remains convinced of
the importance of promoting a more coherent and

comprehensive approach to the responsibility to
protect in all of the Organization’s intergovernmental
bodies. Although the General Assembly remains the
main forum for dialogue on this important subject, the
involvement of the Security Council remains crucial
in view of the fundamental role it plays in resolving
issues related to peace and security. Accordingly, the
Human Rights Council should also play its part by
placing greater emphasis on the prevention of criminal
atrocities within the overall context of the prevention of
human rights violations.
Ms. Ma’udi (Israel): At the outset, we want to
thank the President for organizing this second annual
debate and the inclusion of this topic on the formal
agenda of the General Assembly. We also wish to thank
the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, for his report on this important topic
(A/73/898). We welcome the appointment of a Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect (R2P), Ms. Karen Smith, and we support her
work and the important work of the Special Adviser to
Prevent Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng.
As we watch global events unfold from the Middle
East to Latin America and witness atrocities committed
daily throughout the world, we are reminded each and
every day of the importance of preventing genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. We must all do our best. We must all do more,
individually and as a global community to ensure that
civilians receive the protection they need and deserve.
Two days ago, in the informal meeting of the
plenary on “Combating Anti-Semitism and Other
Forms of Racism and Hate – The Challenges of
Teaching Tolerance and Respect in the Digital Age”, we
heard in speech after speech the words “never again”.
It is our hope as a people who have suffered from
some of history’s greatest atrocities and who continue
to face daily and concrete threats of annihilation that
this is not mere lip service, and that we all uphold the
important principle of the responsibility to protect. In
this regard, we thank the Secretary-General for his call
to guarantee non-recurrence and for early action and, in
particular, for his concrete recommendations to prevent
hate speech.
The State of Israel welcomes the Secretary-General’s
emphasis on the first pillar of the responsibilityto-protect doctrine, namely, the responsibility of
individual States to protect their own populations

from the gravest crimes. We wholeheartedly agree
with and embrace the Secretary-General’s important
message that the responsibility to protect starts first
and foremost at home.
On that front, Israel has adopted a long list of
educational and legislative measures to ensure the
protection of all of its citizens, regardless of their race,
religion or ethnicity. For example, Israel has a longstanding educational policy to both teach and learn from
the lessons of the past, with comprehensive Holocaust
remembrance educational programmes.
In line with the Secretary-General’s call to
embrace diversity, the State of Israel has adopted policy
and legislative measures to prevent discrimination
and ensure diversity in the workplace. Our President
has also advanced a national campaign to promote
tolerance and coexistence among the various sectors
of our society. Consistent with the Secretary-General’s
recommendation for implementing measures to ensure
accountability and the rule of law, Israel also has
undertaken major efforts in recent years, spearheaded
by the second Turkel Commission, which was headed
by a former Supreme Court Justice and joined by
international observers, to review and strengthen
Israel’s internal accountability and investigation
mechanisms. These reforms are ongoing.
Israel is also committed to sharing its experience
and knowledge to further the doctrine of R2P abroad.
We have worked in conjunction with United Nations
bodies to assist post-conflict countries in building
and strengthening their judicial institutions and the
local rule of law. We are exploring options to expand
these efforts along with partner nations here at the
United Nations.
As we stated last year, Israel is and remains fully
committed to the prevention of genocide and mass

atrocities (see A/72/PV.100). In 2005, we joined the
consensus on the World Summit outcome document
(resolution 60/1) which embraced and promoted the R2P
principle, and we continue to support this document. At
the same time, from a legal point of view, we wish to
note again that it is our view that this doctrine does
not create novel legal norms or obligations. Rather,
we believe that the responsibility to protect should be
construed and applied within existing legal frameworks.
As this is an emerging doctrine, we wish to stress yet
again that in order to be more effective and adequately
address the most acute crises and tragedies facing the
world, the principle of R2P must also address the role
and responsibility of non-State actors and terrorist
groups that commit atrocities, blatantly disregarding
international law. Moreover, we believe that the R2P
doctrine should be applied only in the most extreme
situations involving mass atrocities, ethnic cleansing
or genocide.
As the nation-State of the Jewish people and
the victims of many of history’s darkest hours, we
fully embrace the call to protect civilians from mass
atrocities wherever they may be occurring. We must all
play a part as a global community, both domestically
and internationally, to ensure that we are doing our
utmost to protect innocent civilians. The responsibility
to protect cannot be mere words on paper or slogans. It
must be translated to real concrete action. More must be
done to ensure real and lasting peace and security for
all and the protection of innocent civilians worldwide.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item for this meeting. We
shall hear the remaining speakers this afternoon at 3
p.m. in this Hall.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

