Statement by Mr. Tofig F. Musayev
Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Republic of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations
at the 63rd session of the General Assembly on
the responsibility to protect, 28 July 2009
Check against delivery
Mr. President,
We affirmed at the 2005 World Summit Outcome that “each individual State
has the responsibility to protect its populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity”. Thus the authoritative
framework to effectively address the responsibility to protect has been
defined. This framework is based on well-established principles of
international law, according to which States have obligations to prevent and
punish most serious international crimes.

It is essential to note that the relevant provisions of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome reinforce the letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations
and the principle of State sovereignty. These provisions make it clear that
actions in the exercise of the responsibility to protect are to be undertaken
only in conformity with the provisions, purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Although important steps have been made in a number of situations to
address properly the most serious international crimes, populations are still
suffering in many places around the world due to the manifest failure of
individual States to fulfill their most basic and compelling responsibilities,
and the collective inadequacies of international institutions.

Regrettably, even more than 60 years after the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, the conspicuous “silence” in certain
instances, involving in particular situations of military aggression and
foreign occupation, serves to accentuate a deficiency characteristic of the
international community today – the gap between the theoretical values of
law and harsh reality.

This bitter truth represents a profound challenge to the peace, stability and
prosperity and, therefore, requires that we redouble our efforts in
implementing to protect and putting and end to the most serious international
crimes.

-1-

The Secretary-General’s report (A/63/677) on how to implement the
responsibility to protect indeed does take the important first step towards
turning the authoritative words of the 2005 World Summit Outcome into
doctrine, policy and, most importantly, deeds.

We consider important to develop the overall strategy for implementing the
responsibility to protect described in the report, including through searching
the ways in which the United Nations can best help to ensure the fulfillment
of the assembled commitments made in 2005 by Heads of State and
Government.

There should be done more to sharpen the tools for ending impunity. This
requires consistent commitment by States towards their obligations to
prosecute those responsible for the most serious international crimes.

Fighting impunity is essential not only for the purposes of individual
criminal responsibility for such crimes, but also peace, truth, reconciliation
and the rights of the victims. Thus, for example, there must be no
justification for attempts to make the participation in political processes
aimed at putting an end to the conflict situations conditional on demands for
immunity from responsibility. To hold otherwise would be tantamount to
legitimizing the results of mass atrocities and thus to rejecting the
responsibility to protect.

We fully support the idea that more research and analyses are needed on
why one society resorts to mass violence, advocates the notorious concept of
“ethnic incompatibility” and consistently creates monoethnic environment
while its immediate neighbours remain relatively stable in terms of
preserving cultural diversity and fostering respect among various groups.

Azerbaijan is prepared to contribute to such analyses and research which
might serve an important source within our efforts aimed at discouraging
incitement to racial and religious hatred.

We believe that the engagement of the Security Council may significantly
advance the scope of actions to implement the responsibility to protect and
create opportunities to improve common approaches in this regard. At the
same time, the General Assembly as the world’s premier inclusive forum has
an important role to play, especially when the Security Council fails to
exercise its responsibility with regard to international peace and security.

We look forward to continuation of a constructive dialogue and to further
reports of the Secretary-General on the matter