BELGIUM
GENERAL ASSEMBLY - 63 "e

Session

MLSE IN THE CEUVRE
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

DECLARATION
OF
HE MR Jan Grauls
AMBASSADOR
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF BELGIUM
AMONG NATIONS UNlTED

Permanent Representation of Belgium to the United Nations
One Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, 885 Second Avenue, 41emeetage, New York, NY 10017
Phone. 1 (212)378-6300 - Fax 1 (212) 681-7618
- Web-site: htt ~: ~ llwww.di lomatie.be / newyorkun
Email: newvorkun@di~lobel.fed.be

CHECK THE MAKING
Mister President,
There is bient6t four years, our moment limitation leaders and Government adopted, has
Act unanimously and irrevocable manner, the principle of responsibility to protect.

A promise of hope has I'humanite was made: the promise of a future in
which the words genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
I'humanite would be relegated to the history books. They promised to take
fully their responsibilities to ensure that better future. And they promised
solidary way to work by offering mutual assistance and
constructive. It is about each of these promises that I would like to return
today.

All victims of such crimes, whether in Cambodia, Rwanda or
Former Yugoslavia, remind us that no area, no culture is a I'abri
horrors of hatred and violence can lead. And this
promise made at the highest level raises expectations AMONG
victims of these crimes, expectations that it is important to answer. li
goes into effect the credibility of our Organization.

Mister President,
The answer to this promise, and I come along to my second point is
I'enjeu of our debate today. The answer is to set ceuvre
what our leaders decided in 2005. In paragraphs 138 and 139 of
Final Document of the World Summit, we are indeed all engaged
was fully assume our responsibility, both nationally, as
collective manner.

As the Secretary General points out in his report for Implementation of
the responsibility to protect happening primarily by national I'action. The
State responsibility is central effect. This is the very importance of
Pillar and the concept of sovereignty as responsibility. Plut6t that
undermine the sovereignty, the responsibility to protect the reinforced by the
transforming into responsible sovereignty.

Mister President,
The State or a lack of means to assume its own responsibility that is my third point - the international community can, the
International community must help him. This solidarity effort is
well at the heart of the United Nations principles. It is more than
ever necessary, especially with the crises - financial and other - we
must cross together. Again, it is the responsibility of the
International community. These actions of international support, including

regional, are essential and should allow, in many cases,
((Build)> truly the states responsible for their own citizens. II
should, as emphasized by the Secretary General, to root of capabilities
National plutcit that support artificial and temporary faqon.

Unfortunately, it also happens sometimes that a state is not ready to protect its
population against the worst types of crimes. In such circumstances, we
can not abdicate our collective responsibility. We must instead
express our solidarity vis-a-vis civilians. If a state is not
ready to assume its responsibility, while the international community must
to act with all means quJelle has at its disposal, including, but
last resort, coercive means. The collective exercise of the responsibility of
protect is one of the promises we made to victims in 2005
on which we can come back today.

This brings me to my fourth and final point, Mr President: the implementation
implemented. It is this setting ceuvre, which is central to our deliberations
today and not the principle of responsibility to protect himself. II
is not a question for Belgium to reconsider Agreement unanimous 2005.

I'a As rightly said the Secretary General during the presentation of his report,
henceforth it should be ((turn the promise of the responsibility of
protect in reality)). Belgium joins other delegations in thanking
the Secretary General for his commitment and his excellent report
that we consider today. Most of the proposals that its report
contains are not new. They already exist, in full respect of the
Charter, whether in the matter of mediation, prevention
conflict, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. They relate to
first, second or third pillar, we are all working daily.

Other proposals, such as to develop our capacity warning
early prevention and thus deserve to be developed without delay. II we
More than ever, continue this exercise with determination and conviction.

We I'avons promised the victims of these heinous crimes!
Mister President,
These were the messages that Belgium wanted to convey was of I'occasion
this debate, in complement to the statement made by Sweden on behalf of IJUnion
European, statement to which we subscribe fully.

UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION
Mr. President,
Four years ago, our Heads of States and Governments adopted unanimously
and irrevocably the principle of the responsibility to protect. By so doing, we
offered a promise of hope to humanity: the promise of a future in which the
words genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
would be confined to history books. In order to reach this better future, we
promised to assume fully our responsibilities. And we promised to offer each
others a helping hand and to work constructively and in solidarity. Today, I would
like to reflect on these promises.

Victims of crimes, whether in Cambodia, in Rwanda or in Ex-Yugoslavia, remind
us that no region, no culture, is safe from the horror engendered by hate and
violence. The promise of hope that was made at the highest level created
expectations for the populations that suffered from these crimes, and the
credibility of our organization depends on our capacity to answer these
expectations.

Mr. President,
Answering this promise, and I now move to my second point, is the very goal of
the debate we are holding today. The answer lies in the implementation of what
our leaders decided in 2005. By adopting paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World
Summit Outcome Document, we indeed all pledged to fully assume our
responsibility both at national level, and collectively.

As underlined by the Secretary General in his report, the implementation of the
responsibility to protect requires first and foremost national action. The individual
responsibility of States is paramount. There lies the meaning of the concept of
sovereignty as responsibility and of the first pillar. Rather than weakening
sovereignty, the responsibility to protect reinforces it by turning it into responsible
sovereignty.

Mr. President,
If a State lacks the means to assume its responsibility on its own - and this
constitutes my third point -, the international community can, the international
community must offer assistance. This solidarity effort is at the heart of the
very principles of the United Nations. It is all the more important in the face of
the various crises - financial and others - which we must currently face together.

International and regional assistance are essential and must promote the
"consolidation" of States fully responsible for their citizens. As underlined by the

Secretary General, we must allow national capacities to thrive and take root
rather than support them temporarily and artificially.

Regrettably, every now and then, a particular State proves unable or unwilling to
protect its population against the worst crimes. In such circumstances, we
cannot forfeit our collective responsibility. On the contrary, we have to display
our solidarity with civilian populations. In such circumstances, the
international community must use all means at its disposal to react, including, but
as a last resort, coercive measures. The collective exercise of responsibility is
one of the promises we made to the victims in 2005 and which we cannot disown
today.

This leads me to my fourth and last point, Mr. President: implementation.

Implementation lies at the center of today's debate, not the principle of the
responsibility to protect itself. Belgium will not accept any backtracking on the
unanimous agreement of 2005. As the Secretary General rightly stated during
the presentation of his report, "it is high time to turn the promise of responsibility
to protect into practice". Belgium would like to join the other delegations in
thanking the Secretary General for his commitment and for the excellent report
which we are considering today. Most of the activities proposed by the report are
known to us and are already pursued in some form in full respect of the Charter,
whether in the field of mediation, conflict prevention, peacekeeping or peace
building. Whether they relate to the first, the second or the third pillar, they form
much of the daily work of the United Nations. Other proposals, as that to develop
our early warning and prevention capacity deserve to be rapidly implemented.

More than ever, we must undertake this task with determination and conviction.

Mr. President,
This was the message that Belgium wanted to convey on the occasion of this
debate in addition to the statement made by Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, statement to which we fully subscribe