BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

STATEMENT
by

Deputy Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
the United Nations
On the occasion of General Assembly Informal Interactive Dialogue on
the Respsnsibs'hity to Protect

New York
Juty ~ 3 ' 2089
~.

Mr. President,
My delegation wishes to commend the President of the Cenersek Assembly
and his effort to organize this important event, such as this morning's very
productive and interactive exchange of opinions with distinguished panelists
in regard to the very comprehensive Secretq-General report on the
Responsibility to Protect.

Today, and in times that will come, the importance of the responsibility to
protect especially in the light of protection s f safety of people within state
borders is an issue which United Nations and International Community must
pay exceptional attention. As the world leaders outlined in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, the United Nations is responsible to undertake
appropriate measures and collective action in accordance with the Charter,
including Chapter VII, to protect population from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

The notion of sovereignty implies the responsibility of State to protect its
own population, and respect human rights. If the State is unable to do so, the
International Community ought to take stand and adequate measures to put
an end on such activities. Nor State, nor international community, especially
the United Nations as the highest institutional f o r of multilateral
diplomacy, have the right to turn a blind eye on any practice that could lead
to the grave violation of the International humanitarian law.

The responsibility of Member States to respond collectiveEy does not always
have to be a choice between passive observing and use of military force.

Some states need assistance of the international community to build their
capacity to protect, however, a prerequisite for that is readiness of their
political leaders to accept that tmly. In that regard assistance s f regional and
sub-regional organizations and neighboring countries has a pivotal d e.

Regional organizations should have relevant instruments to support capacity
building in the area of conflict prevention, rule of law and security sector
reform, as well as development and human rights, protection of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

However, when it is evident that diplomatic efforts fail, and when it is clear
that states or nonlstate actors are committing or are about to commit crimes
related to the responsibility to protect, collective international military

assistance, as proposed in the Secretary General Report A/63/67'7, may be
the surest way to support the State in meeting its obligations relating to the
responsibility to protect.

As the Report points out, the worst human tragedies of the past that occurred
have no geographical or economic exclusiveness. Neither a state nor a
region is safe from them. Today, as it was in the past, no international
organization has full capacity neither to prevent conflict, nor to protect
population from its consequences. Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the
utmost importance to the establishment of the United Nations9 early warning
capability which is recognized by the Summit. However, it raises the
question on the establishment of mechanism which would effectively
transcend from an early warning sign to the concrete action of the
International Community and the United Nations.

State sovereignty can not be a definite obstacle when stepping up against the
highest crimes known to humanity.

My delegation has no intention to blame and shame the International
Community for what it had not done or what it had done too late with regard
to the conflicts emerged during the process of dissolution of former
Yugoslavia. However, I would like to remind that there were the clear
warning sings. If there were political leaders, in the rnultiethic society, that
called upon the h m a t i o n of exclusively e t h i c states and at the same time
disdaining or denying same rights to other ethnic groups, that was the
warning sign. If there were media that had favorite leaders who were the true
extremists, that was the warning sign. If there were the formations of armed
groups it was not just a warning sign it was the last call before a disaster
taking place.

Unfortunately, now it is well known what has happened afterwards. En that
regard we would like to remind what was stated in the Judgment of the
International h u r t of Justice in its ruling on February 26, 2007. I quote,
"the acts were committed with the specific intent to destroy in part the group
of the Muslims of Bosnia and Herzegovina as such; and accordingly that
these were acts of genocide, committed [. . .] in and around Srebrenica from
about 13 July 1995." Few days ago, we just commemorated 14 years of
Srebrenica tragedy that took place in heart of Europe.

Today, we have an international institution and mechanisms that represent
the legacy of an unfortunate time in our history, namely the International
Criminal Tribunal for fomer Yugoslavia (ICTY). The important eiement to
the prevention must be a strong message: perpetrators of crimes of genocide,
war crimes, e t h i c cleansing and crimes against humanity will be brought to
justice and prosecuted.

Becoming a party to the international human rights instruments,
international humanitarian law and refugee law and above all to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Coun-t should be seen as a factor of
stability for every single State. Political leaders of a state party to the Rome
Statute have to be aware that their actions or wrongdoings, with regard to the
human rights or provisions of the International humanitarian law, are under
observed. This dimension should not be underestimated. But it should not be
misused. In that regard international standards have to be incorporated into
the national legislation and carefully guarded. Domestic law, in that case,
would be .the first line of defense of human rights and humanitarian law