ECUADOR
Permanent Mission to the United Nations

GENERAL DEBATE ON TO PROTECT responsabilida
New York, July 23, 2009

Mr. president,
I wish to thank and congratulate you for making this
debate. The responsibility to protect is an issue that
It requires a serious and thorough analysis by the
General Assembly. For this we thank through
his presidency to the Secretary-General's report A / 63/677
filed on July 21, and the document
conceptual submitted by you on 17 July. Likewise
we congratulate you for organizing the Debate
interactive this morning that it had the
presence and experience high quality panelists
They have facilitated and stimulated debate.

My delegation associates itself with the statement by Ambassador
Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of Egypt
behalf of the Group of Non-Aligned.

Mr. president,
The Ecuador attaches great importance to the role that fits him to
United Nations to establish a world order based
on respect for international law, norms and
principles set out in its Charter, the
promotion and respect of human rights and
International human right.

In its recent constitution, our country establishes
principle for the coexistence of the people the need to
respect human rights and fight for their
compliance. Our Constitution devotes a chapter
full of guarantees which is immersed in the
subject of protection action.

For Ecuador, the issue of the responsibility to protect
is an issue that can not be taken lightly because if
While its concept is based on a humanitarian act
it is also true that it must be implemented under
premises that do not undermine the security and sovereignty of
the states.

Mr. president,
My delegation has examined very carefully the report
presented by the Secretary General and firmly believes that
there is no other body other than the General Assembly
consider this matter of such importance, especially
by political and legal implications of the same.

Similarly, so we heard in these two
days, it is clear that a sustained discussion requires both
on the conceptual aspects and on aspects
This operational concept. There seems no clarity or
agreement on policy and practical implications of
responsibility to protect.

We believe that some of the proposals
presented in the report are part of negotiations in other
spheres on issues such as disarmament, sanctions,
Reform of the Security Council, Humanitarian Assistance,
international cooperation, among others, which is
important to take into account the results that have
reached in those discussions.

Mr. president,
It is important to ensure that the three pillars are addressed
so balanced since each of them
It refers to
issues
of great importance for our
state.

With regard to the first pillar the concept of sovereignty and
implications of any intervention want to be
raised, no can be an interpretation
different from that under international law. With
regarding the obligations that States have, my
delegation believes that as well as invites States
Members to be part of the Rome Statute, should
consider other bodies such as the Human Rights Council
Human, the Peacebuilding Commission and the
United Nations system in general, to use
as instruments to implement the responsibility
to protect. We look with satisfaction in that
You report not intended in any way to open the debate or
extend the mandate issued by the final document A / 60/1,
paragraphs 138, 139 and 140.

As for the second pillar, my delegation would want a
more detailed explanation of the implications of
"Military assistance". Also we look with concern
that in paragraphs 45 to 47 mention the issue of
development assistance and possible conditionality
regarding the responsibility to protect. It is important
taking into account any sanction or embargo
economic to go directly to the detriment of
survival and welfare of civilians and innocent not
It may be an acceptable measure.

Another issue requiring more information and analysis is
the creation of an early warning mechanism is
important to take into account the mechanisms
existing level prevention Nations system

United and
subregional.

the

organizations

regional

and

As for the pillar number three, we are aware that it is
the most complicated of all, since it invokes the Council
Security as an authority on this subject. my delegation
considers that history confirms the role that the Council
Security has had in recent years in cases like
Rwanda
or
Cambodia.

We must
to accept
than
Unfortunately the Council has not been an objective actor,
impartial and effective and that its decisions have not been
transparency and neutrality desired.

It is then
legitimate to ask whether in fact the Security Council
in its current composition and making mechanisms
Decisions in force should be the authority
authorize military intervention for purposes of
human protection or whether it should first move in a
profound and comprehensive reform of the Council that magazine
legitimacy and effectiveness?
In fact, until we have crystal clear
on the conceptual scope, regulatory parameters
and actors could not make any decision
commit our States regarding the application
of this concept. This does not mean of course that
our Organization should remain silent in the face
crimes such as genocide or ethnic cleansing. We must
act, but we must do so in strict compliance with the
international law and principles of nonintervention and
respect for sovereignty and within the framework of agreements
regulatory and political clearings where is eradicated by
full discretion, the unilateralism and double
standards.

Mr. president
We have seen that it is essential to advance a dialogue
Building on this sensitive issue to address all

dimensions and implications of responsibility
to protect. Today we have raised our
initial concerns and we deepen this
dialogue in the future