FRANCE
63emesession of 19Assembli5eGenerale Uniei of Nations

Points 44 and 107
Reunion plenikre on the Responsibility to Protect
Prononche Intervention by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Sharq a.i. of Affairs
France Reprhsentation the UN auprks
New York, July 23, 2009
f Ve'rifierau pronounce ')

63thsession of the United Nations General Assembly

Item 44 and 107
Plenary meeting on the Responsibility to Protect
Speech Delivered by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, a.i. Charging Case,
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
New York, 2009 23rdJuly
(Check anainst deliverv)

MISSION
245 EAST

PERMED
47TH

STREET,

OF

THE

NEW

FRANCE

NEARBY

YORK, N. Y.

10017

OF

NATIONS

UNITED

PHONE. (212) 308-5700

Mister President,
In 2005, d7Etat Leaders riunis in the World Summit
wanted to ensure that never again we will meet again in the world of mass atrocitis these
Crimes of a scale and a cruelty intolkrables such as 2oemesikcle has known too. They
dCfini have for that, by mutual agreement and by consensus, the principle of Waiver of responsability
protect, which brings us today.

This principle of responsabilitk protkger follows the reflections and other lignke
legal frameworks. Both in its preventive dimension than its operational aspect that can
especially if ndcessaire, lead to collective action under Chapter VII, it is a 6l6ment
key to the fight against mass atrocities, in the same way as international humanitarian law,
the international law of human rights and international criminal justice.

His emergence has allowed kte, let me remind you, by the conceptual leap that was
in 1990 annkes I'apparition d7ingkrencehumanitaire the law for the benefit of the victims, as
that formula by France and by Bernard Kouchner, who was enterink several resolutions
of 17Assemb16e Generale. The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide, we just cklebrer 60kme anniversary, has also paved the way for the
responsibility to protect.

The responsibility to protect is not a geographically connoted concept, which would
the fruit of the only volontd of developpks States. I1 is, it must be remembered, the result of the
kminentes reflection of personalities from all continents. I want to kgalement
proof that 17Acteconstitutif of] African Union, D6S 2000 and in Article 4
establishes the principle of the right of] the Union to intervene in a Member State on the decision
Conference in respect of grave circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity.

In fact, States, international communaut6 and the United Nations systkme
has contributed for Implementation of the responsibility for many of protiger d6ja
ann6es. Whether in Kenya in 2008, or in-I'ex Yugoslav Republic of Mackdoine of
1992 to 1999, the international community has montrk it was possible to avoid the worst, by a
mobilization of all stakeholders. The Council has also reaffirmed skcurit6 two
times, in 2006, the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Outcome Document of the Summit
2005 in its r6solutions 1674 on the protection of civilians and 1706 on the crisis in Darfur.

UNSC Resolution 1674 on the protection of civilians has allowed the integration of the
problematic of human rights and international law in a dozen humanitaise
d70pirationsde peacekeeping, thereby kviter mass atrocitks.

The responsibility to protect is therefore widely d6ja. It is recognized as a
Universe1 principle by our Heads of State and Government from bient6t four years. We do
are therefore not reunited here to discuss the definition of the concept, but to debattre
ways to strengthen its implementation ceuvre and respect, as prompted by the Secrktaire
General's report.

Mister President,

The France welcomes the report that Mr. Secretary General has present6 us
two days ago. I1 seems we equilibri and pragmatic.

The report Cvoque approach has both narrow and deep, strictly delimiting the
protkger responsibility of the four enumkr6s crimes by the final document of 2005 genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanitk. France will remain otherwise
attentive to what natural disasters has associkes delibkree inaction of a government
refusing to provide assistance to its population ddtresse or call a humanitarian aid
international, can not lead to a human tragedy that the international community does
could observe a spectator.

France welcomes the important consacrde by the report the preventive action. This is
a key dimension of the responsibility of protiger, by definition it gives to the
national sovereignty, which follow from the states for sustainable obligations to their
populations.

The respect by States of persons skilled Rights, International Humanitarian Law and
Law is the first rkfugiis ktape of responsible sovereignty and the prevention of
four above crimes. We call on States, as called for in the Secretary-General in his
report fully adhere to the permanent international instruments relating to human rights, and
collaborate with institutions which are associkes, particularly the High Commissioner
United Nations Human 1'1-Iomme, the Council of the person skilled rights and procedures
spkciales.

The fight against I'impunite fact igalement part of prkventifs devices has meme
prkvenir mass crimes. France encourages all States that have not become a
parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and has put in place mechanisms
national justice has even ensure that no serious crime goes unpunished.

The international communaut6 R61e has to play in strengthening the capacity of
States, to help them to exercise responsible sovereignty to protkger their populations. The
report lists a diversity of international and regional mechanisms, often related to
dija citkes institutions. We encourage the United Nations system working 5
partnership with the states in this direction, and the logic of intkgrer responsabiliti to protect
in their programs.

In the same way, the aid to dkveloppement, through the promotion of good governance
Democratic and respect 1'Etat right, participate fully in the implementation of the ceuvre
responsibility to protect.

Mister President,
France shares the viewpoint highlighted in the report as I'equilibre has
three pillars. Responsibility for protiger is not limited to the answer to bring a situation
crisis. Its success depends on the contrary our capacitk has all to strengthen prevention
mass crimes. But the responsibility of protkger would not be complete if there was this
that gives it meaning, namely the pillar troisietne, the reaction of the communautk
International when four crimes I'un is about or in the process of being committed.

This reaction of the international community may be multiple ways,
as shown in the report. It does not reduce to A action alone s6curit6 Council, even
if the latter, as defined by the UN Charter, is essential. She understands
also all the peaceful settlement measures diffkrents prkvues by chapter
VI and VIII of the United Nations chaste.

Mister President,
The report Secrktaire gknkral clear that the responsibility to protect is
a broad concept, which eldment key is prevention, and it is everyone's business. of the
States, first, that will find in this report a recall to the ceuvre mkcanismes
national and international able to prkvenir, by respect for human rights and
libestks fundamental, I'apparition of favorable situations the realization of the four crimes
concerned.

But it is also the case for all regional and international organizations
ceuvrent, manikre direct or indirect, to the preservation of the conditions for peace.

It is also the United Nations r81e, whether its diffkrents organs has
beginning with the Council of securitk, services gkneral the Secretariat or the funds and
programs.

France calls on the States, the international community and the Organization of Nations
United as a whole take up the tremendous dkfi, so that never occur in
the world these odious and unacceptable crimes are crimes of genocide, crimes of
war, ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity.

France will take its place in this work every day, whether in its
bilateral action with its partners in its policy dkveloppement, or as a state
membership in international organizations or regional which it appastient.

Mr. President,
In 2005, the heads of state and government meeting at the World Summit wanted to ensure that
never again would we witness mass atrocities-those crimes of intolerable scope and cruelty that
were all too widespread in the 2oth century. For that purpose, they defined, by common
agreement and by consensus, the principle of the responsibility to protect, which brings us here
today.

That principle is in line with other legal frameworks and considerations. By virtue of both its
preventive dimension and its operational aspect, which can, if necessary, result in a collective
action under Chapter VII, it is a key element in the fight against mass atrocities, on a par with
international humanitarian law, international human rights law and the international criminal
laws.

Its emergence was made possible, let me remind you, by the conceptual leap made in the 1990s
with the emergence of the right of humanitarian interference as formulated by France and by
Bernard Kouchner, and which was ratified by several General Assembly resolutions. The
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, whose 6othanniversary
we have just celebrated, also paved the way for the responsibility to protect.

The responsibility to protect is not a geographic concept to be implemented solely by developed
nations. It was developed by prominent figures from every continent. Evidence of that fact is that
article 5 of the Constitutive Act of the African Union in 2000 establishes the principle that the
AU has the right to intervene in a member state when the Conference issues a decision in certain
grave circumstances such as war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.

In fact, nations, the international community and the UN system have already been contributing
to the responsibility to protect for a number of years now. Whether in Kenya in 2008 or in the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia from 1992 to 1999, the international community
demonstrated that it is possible to avoid the worst by mobilizing all of its stakeholders. Twice in
2006, the Security Council reaffirmed the provisions of paragraphs 138 and 139 of the final
document of the 2005 summit in Resolution 1674 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and in 1706 on the Darfur crisis. UNSC 1674 on the protection of civilians also made it possible
to integrate human rights and international humanitarian law in more than a dozen peacekeeping
operations, thereby making it possible to avoid mass atrocities.

The responsibility to protect already largely exists; our heads of state and government recognized
it as a universal principle nearly four years ago. We are therefore meeting not to discuss the
definition of the concept, but rather to debate the means to strengthen its implementation and its
respect, as the secretary-general invites us to do in his report.

Mr. President,
France warmly welcomes the report presented by the secretary-general on this topic. We believe
it is balanced and pragmatic.

The report proposes an approach that is both strict and in-depth, strictly defining the
responsibility to protect against four crimes enumerated by the final document in 2005: genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity. France will also remain attentive to

ensure that natural disasters, combined with the deliberate action of a government that refuses to
provide assistance to its population in distress or to ask the international community for aid, do
not lead to a human tragedy that the international community could only watch helplessly.

France welcomes the important role the report assigns to preventive action. This is a key
component of the responsibility to protect through its definition of national sovereignty, which
gives nations lasting obligations toward their people.

Nations' respect for human rights law, international humanitarian law and refugee law is the first
step toward exercising responsible sovereignty and preventing the four crimes I just mentioned.

We call on States, as the secretary-general does in his report, to fully adhere to the permanent
international instruments pertaining to these rights and to collaborate with the institutions
associated with them, whether they be the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Human
Rights Council or special rapporteurs.

The fight against impunity is also one of the preventive tools capable of preventing mass crimes.

France encourages all nations that have not yet done so to become party to the Rome Statute on
the International criminal Court and to put in place national legal mechanisms to ensure that no
grave crime goes unpunished.

The international community has a role to play in strengthening the capacity of States and
helping them exercise responsible sovereignty in order to protect their people. The report lists a
whole range of international and regional mechanisms, often linked to the institutions already
mentioned. We encourage the UN system to work in partnership with nations on this, and to
integrate the logic of the responsibility to protect in their programs.

Likewise, by promoting democratic governance and respect for the rule of law, development aid
plays a major role in implementing the responsibility to protect.

Mr. President,
France shares the viewpoint highlighted in the report with respect to the balance of the three
pillars. The responsibility to protect is certainly not only the response to a crisis situation, its
success depends on the ability of all of us to strengthen the prevention of mass crimes. But the
responsibility to protect would not be complete without the third pillar that gives it its meaningthat is, the international community's reaction when one of the four crimes is about to be or is
being committed.

This reaction can be expressed through many means, as the report points out. It is not limited to
an action by the Security Council, even though that body, as defined by the UN Charter, is
essential. It also includes all pacific settlement of dispute measures provided by Chapters VI and
VII of the UN Charter.

Mr. President,
The secretary-general's report clearly shows that the responsibility to protect is a broad concept
whose key element is prevention, and it is everybody's business-and first and foremost that of
the nations whom, this report reiterates, must implement national and international mechanisms

to prevent, through respect for human rights and fundamental liberties, the emergence of
situations that could lead to the four crimes listed above.

But is also the business of all the regional and international organizations that work directly or
indirectly on preserving peaceful conditions.

Finally, it is the role of the UN and its different bodies, beginning with the Security Council, the
Secretariat General, and funds and programs.

France calls on nations, the international community and the UN as a whole to meet this
formidable challenge so that never again will we witness such heinous and unacceptable crimes
as genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity.

France will be fully involved in this daily effort, whether through bilateral action with its
partners, in its development policy, or as a member state of regional and international
organizations