the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
WITH UN Organization

The implementation of the responsibility to protect
63emeAssemblee General - Points 44 and 107 of the agenda

New York, 24 juillef 2009

Only the speech delivered prevail

PERMANENT MISSION OF LUXEMBOURG TO THE NATIONS UNlTED
17 Beekman Place, New York, N.Y. 10022

TEL, (212) 935-3589

Mr. Prksident,
I fklicite me to organize our dkbat a UN 1'Assemblke gkndrale
to discuss the rappost gknkral Secrktaire on for Implementation of responsabilitk
of protkger and I fully to the statement by the Reprksentant of prononcke
the Sukde on behalf of the Union europkenne.

The concept of responsabilitk of protkger has KT6 endossk by our leaders at the highest
level. Loss of the 2005 World Summit, I'Assemblke gdnkrale has indeed adopt6 by
consensus the outcome document, paragraphs 138 and 139 form the basis of
responsabilitk of the protkger. The International entike communautk has thus
engagke solemnly and arretk the obligation of each State to its protCger
people of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against the humanitk. Our Heads of State and Government recognized the need kviter
the kvitable, that is to say, reproduce kchecs international communautk face
atrocitks in Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia and Cambodia.

This first report on the implementation of the responsabilitk protkger is not
essential to the klaboration a stratkgie concrkte aimed to translate this concept in
facts.

Mr. Prksident,
All 1'ONU of Member States agreed in 2005 that the responsabilitk of protkger
does not constitute a challenge to the principle of ktatique souverainetk, which is the
foundation of international relations XXIkme sikcle nor the justification for
arbitrary interventionism. As Secrktaire gknkral recalls in his report,
responsabilitk of protkger allike is not the opponent of souverainetk. The
souverainetk implies rights but also responsabilitks, and among these
responsabilitks, none is as important as that of protkger its citizens. the portke
This is responsabilitd limitke four types of heinous crimes particuli6rement
are genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
the humanitk.

Parallklement, paragraphs 138 and 139 prkvoient the international communautd
helps States to fulfill their obligations dkcoulant of responsabilitk of protkger,
encouraging them to actively exercise their responsabilit6s or helping to strengthen the
national capacitks for prkvenir crimes. The preventive action is actually
Component-century of responsabilitk of protkger since it aims to save lives. The
establishment of an early warning systkme like suggkre the report may indeed
contribute prdvenir potential tragedies. My country is convinced that investment
in training programs on human rights, mediation, the prkvention
conflict, crisis management and good governance will bdndfique long term.

Many international actors can play a crucial dgalement R61e in matiire of
prkvention including rkgionales organizations - and I only mention ECOWAS
has a mkcanisme early warning - the Council of Human Rights through its

Universal pkriodique examination, the Peacebuilding Commission for peace missions
ktablissement of facts, humanitarian actors, the opdrations staff
peacekeeping but also the gknkral Secrktaire himself. In first place
However, it is for Member States to ceuvrer to prkvenir conflicts.

Finally the responsabilitk of protkger kgalement can translate into Action
Collective international communautk, through 1'ONU and case by case
protkger for people against serious crimes and violations when States
obviously lacking their protection obligations. In situations
kvoluent quickly, it is indeed vital that we can as quickly to rkagir
save lives.

Mr. Prksident,
While it may appear to the diffkrences on responsabilitk of protkger ago
However strong consensus among all Member States, that of honoring the principle of
'Never Again'. The concept is limited, we must now focus on its implementation
ceuvre. My country welcomes the dlaborkes recommendations in the report to set
ceuvre of the responsabilitk protkger. I1 be important primarily to each of us to
demonstrate the political volontk ndcessaire progressed to this setting to ceuvre
UN and deepen this concept through other contributions
Secrktaire gknkral about it.

Mister President,
It is constantly keeping ii mkmoire mind the millions of victims of atrocitks
committed by the pass6 we have the urgent obligation to continue our dialogue
in this chamber on for Implementation of the responsabilitd of protkger.

Mr. President,
I welcome this debate at the General Assembly of the United Nations to discuss the
report of the Secretary General on the implementation of the responsibility to protect and
I align myself with the statement made by the Representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

The concept of the responsibility to protect has been endorsed by our leaders at the
highest level. At the World Summit in 2005, the General Assembly indeed unanimously
adopted the Outcome Document of which paragraphs 138 and 139 form the basis of the
responsibility to protect. The entire international community has taken a solemn
commitment by underlining the obligation of State to protect its citizens from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. Our Heads of State and
Government have recognized that it is fundamental to avoid the avoidable, that is, the
repetition of the failures of the international community in the face of the atrocities
committed in Rwanda, in ex-Yugoslavia and in Cambodia.

This first report on implementing the responsibility to protect is a major step towards a
concrete strategy translating the concept into reality.

Mr. President,
All Member States of the UN have recognized in 2005 that the responsibility to protect
does neither weaken the principle of State sovereignty, which is at the core of
international relations in the 21" century, nor justify arbitrary interventionism. As the
Secretary General recalls in his report, the responsibility to protect is an ally of
sovereignty, not an adversary. Sovereignty entails rights but also responsibilities, and
among the latter, none is as important as the responsibility to protect one's citizens. The
scope of this responsibility is limited to four types of particularly heinous crimes, namely
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Paragraphs 138 and 139 further stipulate that the international community shall assist
States to meet their obligations under the responsibility to protect, by encouraging them
to effectively carry out their responsibilities or by assisting them to reinforce their
national capacities to prevent crimes. Preventive action is indeed the key component of
the responsibility to protect, as it seeks to save lives. The establishment of an early
warning capacity, as the report suggests, could as a matter of fact contribute to preventing
potential tragedies. My country is convinced that investing into training programmes on
human rights, mediation, conflict prevention, crisis management and good governance
will be beneficial in the long term. Many international actors can also play a crucial role
in terms of prevention, in particular regional organizations - and I'll mention only
ECOWAS, which has an early warning mechanism -, the Human Rights Council through
its universal periodic review, the Peacebuilding Commission, the members of fact finding
missions, humanitarian actors, peacekeepers, but also the Secretary General himself. It is
however first and foremost up to Members States to work towards the prevention of
conflicts.

Finally, the responsibility to protect can also translate into collective action by the
international community, through the United Nations, on a case by case basis, to protect
populations against crimes and violations when States manifestly fail to meet their
protection obligations. In fast-evolving situations, it is indeed vital that we are able to
react quickly to save human lives.

Mr. President,
Their might be differences of views on the responsibility to protect but there is a strong
consensus among all Member States to honor the principle of the "Never Again". The
concept is laid out, it is now time to focus on its implementation. We all have to show the
necessary political will to take this implementation forward at the United Nations and to
deepen the concept on the basis of further contributions from the Secretary General.

Mr. President,
The memory of the millions of victims of past atrocities is a constant reminder that we
have a burning obligation to pursue our dialogue in this forum to implement the
responsibility to protect