Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft
Swiss Confederation
Confederazione Svizzera
Confederaziun svizra

Permanent Mission of Switzerland
to the United Nations in New York
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations in New York

Only the text is authentic say

63 "E

The General Assembly session

Points 44 and 107 of the agenda
The implementation of the responsibility to protect
Declaration
of
HE Mr. Peter Maurer
Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations

Check against delivery

63rdsession of the General Assembly

Agenda items 44 and 107
Implementing the responsibility to protect
Statement
by

H.E. Mr. Peter Maurer
Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations

New York, July 23, 2009

Mister President,

Switzerland welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts in his will to operationalize the
responsibility to protect, on the basis of consensus in September 2005. In this
perspective, I would like to thank the presentation made it two days ago in the report
exam. It is important that we continue together to ensure that the
as responsibility

))

((

sovereignty

is translatable into concrete, measurable actions on the ground,

respect for human life and in accordance with our decision, there are four years of
engage in this cause.

The concept of responsibility to protect is, as recalled by the Secretary-General, a
combines that of sovereignty. It must ittre considered within the strict framework of
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the and on the basis of I'approche narrow but
deep, proposed by the Secretary General. This approach, which is part of
the United Nations Charter, is distinct from that of interventions called

((

humanitarian

)),

and we will engage for this distinction is maintained clearly.

The report examines today is an important political mobilization tool
allows each State and the international community as a whole to take
knowledge of the instruments available to prevent mass atrocities. This
Cataloging should allow us to bring more coherence in our actions. It must
as we get them consider all preventive measures and assistance available
before using, as a last resort, the envisaged measures under the Third Pillar,
arrgter for the mass atrocities committee I'encontre of a civilian population.

Mister President,
I'd like to mention some items that seem useful to the pursuit
our discussions related to the responsibility to protect.

First, it is important to remember that the obligations of States under the law
International independently exist I'emergence a situation under the concept
of responsibility to protect. These obligations can not and should & re weakened. II
should also be noted that if the concept contains many existing obligations
under international law, there is a political concept and does not represent in itself
new standard. He did not subtract the effect of States obligations.

conventional and customary law in matters of international law rights I1homme1de
humanitarian and refugee law.

Second, we must maintain a clear distinction between the concept of responsibility to
protect and the protection of civilians. To do this, it is crucial to take on way
proactively specificities of each concept and scope. For example, it is necessary
stressed that the protection of civilians deals with the respect of the rights of I'ensemble
Civilians, not only international crimes covered by liability
to protect. The progress made in the field of the protection of civilians are very
important relevent humanitarian principles, and it is essential to preserve them and
continue to develop them in this direction.

Third, we I'avons said, the presented instruments are mostly known.

Yet what is lacking at this stage, it is a reflection on what did not work during
passee their use. We know this is rarely the lack of information that is
problematic but plutbt absence of political willingness at the right time which is at the heart of
our failures assists. An important remedy it means is that the permanent members of
Security Council undertake to renounce use their veto in cases of
genocide, crimes against humanity, ethnic cleansing and war crimes. In
optical m6me, it is important that they contribute to strengthen the achievements in the field of
fight against I'impunite in a general vision of prevention. For its part, the Assembly
General should continue to work in for Implementation of the responsibility to protect and
to mobilize the international community as a whole on its implementation.

Finally, paragraph 50 of the report called the United Nations, pursuant to paragraph 139
the Final Document, has resolved to collective action and ensure no follow a
series of arbitrary procedures that emphasize and gradual form at the expense of the background and
the method has u detriment of results. In this context, it will embark on the
way most effective to ceuvre the Third Pillar. Several questions remain
unanswered: what is the intervention threshold for collective action
desired

>)

((

resolved in time

? Who owns the competence to decide what is a situation of genocide, of

crime against humanity, ethnic cleansing and war crimes? In particular,
how IIAssemblee General and the Secretary General can they offer solutions
complementary to those of the Council or in case of blockage in the Council? How? 'Or' What
strengthen in this context I'accountability Council? In this regard, we believe that
follow the recommendation was raised in paragraph 62 of the report - namely a
invitation to a discussion of principles, rules and doctrine that should guide

I'usage of force in extreme situations relating to the concept - could contribute to
this reflection.

Mister President,
We must re & animes of the obligation not only to respect but also to
that of ensuring respect for international law, for I'humanite continues to recognize in
I'ONU the best guarantee of peace and international security. Responsibility for
protecting therefore concerns the international community as a whole.

Unofficial Enalish translation
Mr President,

Switzerland welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to operationalise the responsibility
to protect on the basis of the consensus of September 2005. 1 would like to thank him for the
presentation two days ago of the report under review. It is vital that we should continue
together to ensure that the notion of "sovereignty as responsibility" is translated into specific
action that is measurable on the ground, respects human life and conforms to the decision
that we took four years ago to act on behalf of this cause.

As the Secretary-General points out, the concept of responsibility to protect is an ally of that
of sovereignty. It therefore needs to be considered in the strict framework of paragraphs 138
and 139 of the Outcome document and on the basis of the narrow but deep approach
proposed by the Secretary-General. This approach, which is enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, is distinct from the so-called "humanitarian" interventions, and we are committed to
ensuring that this distinction will be clearly maintained.

The report under review today is a major instrument of political mobilisation which enables
each State and the international community as a whole to familiarise themselves with the
instruments available to prevent mass atrocities. This cataloguing should enable us to
achieve greater coherence in our undertakings. It should also lead us to consider all the
preventive and assistance measures available before, as a last resort, using the measures
set out in the Third Pillar to stop mass atrocities against a civilian population.

Mr President,
I would like to mention a number of aspects that may help us continue our discussions about
the responsibility to protect.

Firstly, it is important to stress that the obligations of States with regard to international law
exist regardless of the emergence of a situation in which the concept of responsibility to
protect may come into play. These obligations cannot and must not be diluted. It should also
be emphasised that although the concept contains numerous existing international law
obligations, it remains a political concept and does not in itself constitute a new norm. Nor

does it have the effect of dispensing States from their conventional and customary law
obligations with regard to human rights law, international humanitarian law and refugee law.

Secondly, a clear distinction needs to be maintained between the concept of responsibility to
protect and that of the protection of civilians. To do this, it is essential to define proactively
the specific features of each concept and their field of application. For example it should be
stressed that the protection of civilians deals with the entire set of rights of civilians, not only
the international crimes covered by the responsibility to protect. The progress achieved in the
area of protection of civilians is very important and is derived from humanitarian principles. It
is essential to maintain this and to continue to make improvements within this framework.

Thirdly, as we have said, the instruments presented are for the most part well known.

However, what is lacking at this stage is reflection on what did not work when these
instruments were used in the past. We know that the problem is not usually the lack of
information. It is the absence of political will at the right time that is at the heart of our past
failures. One important means of remedying this would be for the permanent members of the
Security Council to refrain from using their veto in cases of genocide, crimes against
humanity, ethnic cleansing and war crimes. It is also important that they should help to
strengthen the acquis in the area of the fight against impunity as part of a general policy of
prevention. For its part the General Assembly should continue to work towards the
implementation of the responsibility to protect and should mobilise the international
community as a whole to implement it.

Finally, paragraph 50 of the report, in accordance with paragraph 139 of the Outcome
document, calls on the United Nations to carry out determined collective action and not to
follow arbitrary and graduated procedures that prize form over substance and process over
results. In this context, we will need to consider the most effective way of implementing the
Third Pillar. Several questions are still pending: what is the threshold of intervention for
"timely and decisive" response? Who is responsible for deciding on whether a situation
constitutes genocide, a crime against humanity, ethnic cleansing or a war crime? In
particular, how can the General Assembly and the Secretary-General offer complementary
solutions to those of the Council or in the event of deadlock within the Council? How can the
accountability of the Council be strengthened? We believe that the follow-up of the
recommendation in paragraph 62 of the report - an invitation to review the principles, rules
and doctrines which should guide the use of force in the extreme situations concerning this
concept - could contribute to this reflection.

-*
Mr President,
We should be actuated not only by the obligation to respect but also to ensure the respect of
international law, so that humanity can continue to regard the UN as the best guarantor of
international peace and security. The responsibility to protect concerns the international
community as a whole