Draft Statement for UNGA debate on RtoP

Mr President,

I would like to align the UK with the statement delivered by the Swedish
Permanent Representative on behalf of the EU.

I am particularly pleased to be deliveripg the UK statement at this debate
on implementing the Responsibility to Protect.

The endorsement of RtoP by the largest ever assembly of world leaders
was, for me, one of the most important elements of the World Summit
Outcome. As an achievement, it was nothing short of groundbreaking
and one of which we should be rightly proud. And we should give
thanks to our African colleagues, for showing us the way with their own
commitment to the principle of non-indifference as enshrined in the AU
Constitutive Act.

The term "never again" resonates with us all. Our shared memories of
Rwanda and Srebrenica ensure that it is a commitment that every UN
Member State can support. The question has always been, how to put
this into practice? The Responsibility to Protect is a concept which
allows us to do just this. And now four years after we agreed the
principle, the UK welcomes this debate on how to take forward
implementation within the UN. The Secretary-General has provided us
with recommendations, a framework, if you like, for action. But we must
play our parts and seize this opportunity to continue consideration of
how to make real progress on operationalisation.

The UK finds the report well-balanced and true to the 2005 agreement.

It is clear about what RtoP is and also, in the face of many
misconceptions, what it is not. More importantly, the report is also
practical. The three-pillared approach of State responsibility, assistance
and response aids conceptual clarity, as does the emphasis on the need
for an early and flexible response. Every situation is different and we
must guard against an overly-prescriptive, and I would say, overlysimplistic "checklist" approach to action. RtoP activity encompasses a
wide range of possible actions designed to help States protect their
populations - all, as the Secretary-General makes clear, in accordance
with the UN Charter. Collective action should be determined by an
assessment of the situation on the ground and of the best tool suited to
address that.

In this context, I should take a moment to highlight the importance of two
issues: the first being the key role to be played by regional
organisations. If we are to implement RtoP effectively, it is right that
they should take or share the lead in reacting to crisis situations in their
regions. And secondly, the value to be found in improving and better
co-ordinating our early warning efforts, our use of and receptivity to
information - a more cohesive UN approach to this can only enhance our
collective prevention efforts.

The Secretary-General's explanation of RtoP as a "narrow but deep"
concept is also helpful in terms of implementation. While the concept
applies to the four crimes only, there are many ways and means by

which States can put it into practice. In the UK1sview, RtoP should be a
governing principle of all Member States' work across the conflict
spectrum, as well as on human rights and development. Building good
governance, the rule of law, and effective judicial and security sectors all
goes towards building a preventive environment in which RtoP crimes
would be less likely to take place.

I will conclude by saying a little about what I think we should be trying to
achieve here, that is an RtoP-culture, a culture of prevention that is as
much about responsible sovereignty as it is international assistance. A
culture that in the long-term will help us to prevent mass atrocities and
reduce conflict and the cost of conflict. A culture that will help us to build
an international system which is better equipped and more effective at
preventing and responding to conflict. A culture which fosters our ability
to reach consensus on timely and decisive action. I don't think anyone
here would disagree with those goals. And I very much hope that none
would seek to delay implementation through procedural or administrative
means. This is too important to us all - we made a commitment in 2005,
a commitment to practical action. We must now live up to that