lntervencidn of Ambassador Jorge Valero
Permanent Representative of the
Bolivariana de Venezuela Republics

General Debate on lnforme of the Secretary
General: Implementing the responsibility of
to protect

(Please check with the words of the speaker)

New York, July 24, 2009

CMH-WBWTfi & ENTEB:

8DW & i & l:

59:56 A N: & @ $ & 09 8171

Fax & WW

Setior President,
We meet here to start a debate on the responsibility to protect
poblaci6n of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing. If you were discussing in the abstract, and all actors involved in 10s
the dinarnica of international relations act inspired by a truth-from
visi6n hollstica, this issue does not generate deberla not under any misunderstanding. However, the
light of contemporary historical experience, is an issue deeply
controversial.

First, by the dominance they have in the rnundo today, we are
It sure will change in the future, dorninantes imperial powers, whose interests
generally determine the course of the dynamics of international relations.

There is also a relevant situational circumstances: the lack of regulations
rnarco binding in this forum. Paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Final Docurnento
Summit 2005 rjnicos 10s are items available for this consideraci6n
General Asarnblea.

Many delegations argue in good faith the responsibility to protect,
sincerarnente concerned about acts of genocide, war crimes, crirnenes of
against humanity and ethnic lirnpieza, that have occurred in some parts of the rnundo. No
dudarnos rnuestran of those who sincerely concerned about the occurrence of
these crimes. Certainly, crimes that lacerate the consciousness of the civilization
human. Crimes must be condemned and avoided anywhere in the
world. ~ Q u i e npodria rnantenerse indifferent to such indignities as those
occurred in Rwanda and elsewhere in the rnundo ?. It is necessary to prevent impunity
its perpetrators, Venezuela adds to that concern and makes it his own. Our
country condemns without equivocation, 10s acts of genocide, war crimes 10s, 10s
crirnenes against humanity and ethnic lirnpieza, who ios comet cometalos.

Seiior President,

President Hugo Chavez Frias in a historic intewencion held in this room
in the HOOP 2005, when it discussed the Final Document, he asked two questions of
irrefutable relevance: ~ Q u i e NVA to protect and how it will protect?.

Rnisma on that occasion, the rnayoria delegations were excluded from debates 10s
10s on 81 main issues listed, including responsibility for
to protect.

It is appropriate, therefore, the lnteractivo Diaiogo led by the President of the
General Assembly, Father Miguel D'Escoto, in which four recognized participated
inteiectuales. A good start for vigorous exarnen this topic.

Distinguished panelists offered two approaches to responsibility
to protect:
One, rnuy enthusiast who calls us to have faith and to give it olv ~ opresi6n exerted by 10s
10s d8biles strong countries against countries; the other offers an analysis of irrefutable
historical facts and invites us to stop on the structural causes and
hegemonic imperial domination exercised over history, par powers
Imperial West, as deteninantes elements 10s most serious conflicts
who suffered and humanity suffers today.

Seiior President,

The political doctrine classical remember that the population is a constitutive element of the
State and BstEII intrlnsecas exercises powers of protection. In this regard,
It can be considered a principle of universal validity that is integral to the
hurnana existence of any society. The part of the attributions
each State to guarantee their population equal to the full enjoyment
of political rights, civiies, economic, social and cultural.

In that order, 10s States seek to achieve happiness for its citizens, and are
norrnas and principles provided legal to do so. From that perspective,
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity of States are principles 10s
10s universal that allow States to exercise its responsibility to protect
population.

To fulfill that responsibility hernos 10s in developing countries come

raising in this body, insistently and repeatedly, the recognition of the
Right ai development that all peoples of the world 10s and 10s law
Peoples to Peace.

In this context, the lnternational law recognizes the right of states to use 10s,
exploitation and management of natural resources and wealth; the right to a
new fair, equitable and solidary economic order; the right of peoples to 10s
cooperation and solidarity; the prohibition of advocacy of violence, intolerance,
the discriminacl6n and xenophobia; respect for all countries 10s to early 10s
foment0 of international friendship, dialog0 and reconciliation, non utilization
of the use of force or the threat of using it.

Ck # ~ - # $ & ATS

#ENTEP:

84 @@ # 3q, 1 & 1: 59: 56

AN:

@ 8171 @ && # 09

Fax & F, ~ ~

This is not an exhaustive list. 10s are just some of central aspects of
be respected by all, especially by the imperial powers, would prevent
generating conflicts that could lead to serious crimes against
humanity. Towering indexes of poverty, harnbruna, 10s serious scourges that
affect humanity contrast with the rude acurnulacion of a few and are
indisputable indicators of the fracas0 of the model of production, distribution and consurno,
selfish, individualists, predatory and inequitable, that characterizes capitalism.

Setior President,
The p6rrafo 138 of the Final Document of the 2005 Summit, it stresses the intrinsic
to the State's responsibility to protect its population from crimes under 10s
international humanitarian law. What is new is the saber sefialamiento the
responsibility of the international cornunidad to encourage and assist 10s States
d ~ charesponsabilidad to exercise and to establish, within the framework of UN mechanisms
"early warning".

For Venezuela these mechanisms must address - mainly - the
claims of peoples, inalienable rights, their claims
historical, for achieving societies based on justice, equality and
solidarity.

Seiior President,
Paragraph 139 of the Final Document of the 2005 Summit, requires exhaustive
discussion process within the framework of the General Assembly, allowing weigh the
significance of each element in the content.

We believe that there 10s elements described will require necessarily a
substantive reform of the United Nations Charter. Our delegation does not
acompafia whom they consider unnecessary to establish a legal basis for the possible
irnplernentacion of the responsibility to protect.

NEST instrument lower 10s may not authorize permanent members of the
Security Council to implement a mecanisrno that allow these exercise
alleged collective action, implementing the responsibility to protect, without any
norrna binding, unless the structure of the Council is modified and elirnine
definitely the discriminatory power of the veto. A aspect0 to be underlined is
that if it is hoped that the responsibility to protect is a multilateral mechanism
Collective action, this must be under the jurisdiction of the General Assembly.

Paragraph 139 points out, in turn, the responsibility to protect can be activated
when it becomes clear that national authorities fail to protect their populations from
10s crimes against humanity.

However, ~ Q u eorgan0 United Nations determines when to
intewenir ?; i Q or 6 parameters serhn tornadoes in consideracidn to catalog
situacib as emergency and postponed the intetvencion Haria ?; 'Who
ensures that intewencion not executed for political reasons ?. will have ran 10s
192 states that now make up this organizacibn the same right to participate and
Corno qualify emergencies?.

Some argue that the Security Council would be the body suitable for
irnplernentar the Annada or enforcement action when applied requiem in liltima
instance, the responsibility to protect. At that point, our delegation would like to
his opposition firrne.

Reforrna complex process of the Security Council is proof of that

Organa, as it is currently organized, does not respond to the reality of nuestm
real world.

We agree that trust is the point neuralgic0 for the exarnen
responsibility to protect. But, 'Who can guarantee that there will be IMPLEMENTING
that selective approach? ~ Q u i e ngarantiza that the responsibility to protect can
pretext0 serve imperial countries to conduct interventions in countries
weak, politically motivated.

It is curious that apparently will seek to involve the entire international cornunidad
for the adoption and acceptance of this approach, which is then pretend8 PER0 the
fundamental decisions involving the use of military force, be taken by
Only five countries that enjoy veto power.

If an honest and good faith discusi6n want on the responsibility to protect
General Assembly is the organ par excellence where decisions must be taken
relevant.

Sei5or President,
Now let me turn briefly to the lnforrne of the Secretary-General
In no reference is made to the causes that give rise to serious crimes 10s
against the population. 10s are selective cited cases of serious crimes
against the population. One of 10s Emblematic cases, the slaughter against the people
Palestinian, is not mentioned. 10s Tarnpoco attacks against child population
Afghanistan. Alin least the sufrirniento of the Iraqi people, whose war has caused more than

1,200 thousand rnuertos, segtin the British Opinion Research Group for Research
Business.

iQui6n protect the Iraqi people from the genocide that was committed? 'Who calls
accounts that criminal invasi6n committed, before the silence c6mplice of algUn0s
inefables advocates responsibility to protect?.

In that regard, and as irrefutable proof of this transparent cornpromiso
mecanisrno propose that 10s countries and peoples of the world engaged in this case and
no more dernoras, the responsibility to protect. The Security Council
avoque to seek punishment for 10s responsible for the genocide that has caused more
one million dead civilians and, therefore, takes the former President of
United States George W. Bush and 10s mainly responsible for this slaughter, to 10s
estrados of the International Criminal Court.

Igualrnente that the responsibility to protect apply to the Security Council
the elite political and rnilitar of Israel, to 10s crirnenes of genocide and cleaning ETN ~ ca
committing against the Palestinian people.

The hierarchy gives lnforme rnisrna to 10s three pillars of responsibility
to protect. Considers that if our delegaci6n 10s elements to be strengthened
They have to do with the responsibility of the State and international assistance
the formaci6n capacity, putting into practice a third pillar would not be made
necessary. It turns out that the third pillar is precisely which represents a
Princ ~ 10s challenge to piosde international law, as they are integrity
10s territorial states, non intervenci6n in internal affairs and, of course, that of
the indivisible sovereignty of the State.

The concept of the responsibility to protect seeks to reformulate the concept of
sovereignty, recognized in international law. They talk grandly of
called "responsible sovereignty". This concept goes far beyond the objective
It arises with the responsibility to protect.

Our delegation considers that the United Nations should fornentar peace and
10s cornbatir all crimes against humanity, by the exarnen
10s real causes that generate conflicts and not just its consequences.

Vivirnos a world dominated by the major powers of the West, 10s
private international rnonopolios, which are generally 10s main
responsible for vioiencia generated between states and regions and inside
they. These political and econornicos, interests are exercised power through their medidtico
and international lobbying capacity, and often hide the truth. Criminalize

developing countries and cause them deterrninan rnasacres greater than those
Corno generate a result of ethnic, religious or conflicts between countries of the South