Statement by H.E. Mr. Ferit HOXHA
Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Albania to the United Nations
Seventh Informal Interactive Dialogue of the United Nations General Assembly on
the Responsibility to Protect
New York, 8 September 2015
Check against delivery
Let me express our gratitude for the report of the Secretary General. It
contains an ambitious agenda, sets priorities, and it outlines challenges and
recommendations for actions at the global, regional and national level. Albania fully
supports them.

The RtoP has catalyzed important developments during the last 10-years.

Progress has been made in building a global political consensus around R2P, as a
very practical and effective framework for preventing mass atrocity crimes.

However, developing the norm alone does not provide for prevention or protection.

Gaps continue to exist in the development and implementation of specific
strategies and policy interventions to enhance early and effective R2P
implementation. There are also significant policy and capacity deficiencies in
regional and sub-regional implementation mechanisms. We do believe that the
growing support for the normative framework should be matched with the
necessary political will, and most importantly resources to prevent atrocity crimes.

The rise of violent extremism and non-state armed groups perpetrating
atrocities, particularly against ethnic and religious minorities, continues to be one of
the most pressing challenges, and it must be defeated. While confronting this mass
killing machine with military means, we need to do more and better, first disrupting
recruitment and prevent the flow of fighters, work in community while reflecting on
the need to finding the best ways means to strengthening inclusive societies.

Mr. Moderator,
Albania reaffirms its firm position that when resolutions on imminent or
ongoing crises involving genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, or ethnic
cleansing come before the Security Council’s, Permanent Members must not
obstruct action to protect populations. The catastrophic situation in Siria and its
disastrous human consequences are a strident call in this sense.

Further, Albania reiterates its support to the French proposal and the efforts
of ACT for a “Code of Conduct” regarding the use of veto in the Security Council in
situations of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing.

Mr. Moderator,
The RtoP global network has further expanded to include officials from 50
countries, representing a quarter of the UN Membership. We also welcome the fact
that the European Union has recently become the first regional organization to
officially appoint an RtoP Focal Point. We encourage Member States that have not
yet done so, to appoint National RtoP Focal Points and to further join the growing
Global Network.

Mr. Moderator,
This Tenth Anniversary of R2P offers an opportunity for all of us to renew and
further the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

It is with the above understanding that Albania supports the Human Rights
Up Front Action Plan, which is an important initiative to enhance the UN’s
institutional preparedness for situations that may deteriorate into the commission
of mass atrocity crimes.

And last but not least: during the 28th HRC session Albania supported the
inclusion of RtoP references in the resolution “On the Prevention of Genocide”. We
also support the UNGA draft-resolution establishing the International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of Genocide (to be adopted within few
days by the GA)