A B E L E N G L
The delegation of Belarus expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his Special Adviser for the report. specially
I would like to draw attention to its balanced and focused
on the nature of the facts.

It must be recognized that the practical implementation of the concept
UN Security Council identified a number of problematic aspects. So,
particular abstract provisions of Security Council resolutions and
some
sidedness
in
decision
question
responsibility
parties to the conflict for human rights violations and breaches of international
humanitarian law in situations of internal armed conflict
(For example, the resolution on Libya gave States the opportunity in their
activities go beyond the mandate of the UN Security Council).

Our delegation supports the set of conclusions set out in
report. So, we believe fair conclusions about the need for awareness
permanent UN Security Council members of its general special
responsibility for the prevention of the situations covered by the concept; key
as an effective and stable government in preventing such
crimes;
necessity
further
implementation
potential
regional organizations to operationalize the concept of.

We fully share the view that the need
additional and very serious study embodiments
concept third component (outside interference) is not associated with
use of armed force. You should not close our eyes to the parameters
implementing the third force component concept in strict compliance
with the UN Charter. Here, too, there is a need for a balanced and
pragmatic study.

Belarus successively assumes that semantic
filling, operationalization and, ultimately, implementation of the concept
It refers to the competence of States. In this regard, we emphasize that
legitimacy and proper implementation of the concept is directly dependent on accounting
positions and interests of all States.

Based on this, we have to point out some controversial
points of the report. Thus, in the context of the enhanced promotion of the concept of
conjunction with the initiative "Rights - especially" underline the key

the importance of confidence on the part of the international system
implementation of the concept, including the bodies and organizations of the UN system. double
standards and the promotion of international structures and confrontational
uncoordinated initiatives seriously undermine prospects
implementation of the concept and its legitimacy.

Dubious value is the creation of new structures, expansion
network of contact persons and the inclusion of the relevant item on the agenda of the GA
UN. There is a serious danger of substituting similar formalities
reforms complicated process of finding a compromise on the concept.

It is important to take a cautious approach to reform the mandates,
peacekeeping missions in order to do peacekeeping party
conflict. In the context of the introduction of various types of systems and indicators
"Early warning" should recognize and study the risks of "false
response "of these systems