PERMANENT MISSION OF CUBA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
315 Lexington Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016 (212) 689-7215, fax (212) 689-9073

STATEMENT BY THE DELEGATION OF CUBA IN THE INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE FOR
PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT ON RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT ".

Mr. President;

First let me congratulate you and express instead the sincerest
Cuba appreciation for his commendable work as Chairman of the meeting
69 of the General Assembly of the UN to be completed in the next days.

With relacién to the topic at hand the Delegation of Cuba would ratify
that the General Assembly is the forum indicated for an examination
depth genocide, war crimes, ethnic and depuraci6n
crimes against humanity; which constitute heinous crimes
to repudiate.

However it is intended to include the item on the agenda of the UN General Assembly, as a
Topic, to monitor and evaluate compliance. that proposal
I could only be acceptable if it was directed to build consensus on the
content and scope of R2P, and to give greater weight to said UNGA
process.

Cuba wishes to make clear that there is no mandate for the inclusion in the
Office on the prevention of genocide, and the charge established atencién
for the Responsibility to Protect.

The report on which we discussed today interactively, call the
implementacién of R2P and to put aside discussions on its scope and
content, which contradicts the mandate contained in paragraph 139 of the
60/1 document. It should not be waived by the General Assembly reaches
consensus on R2P to resolve differences of interpretation on
the same, to ensure their recognition and universal acceptance and grant
legitimacy to the actions proposed for implementation.

During this debate we could not aspire to States to implement the
concept and the pillars of the Responsibility to Protect, when there is nothing
which obliges them to do so. It is not possible to accept recommendations on this issue
when we have never accepted the concept as a principle, and it seems
appropriate to go beyond what adopted at the Millennium Summit 2005.

Mr. President; Cuba does not share some approaches to the report, which assume certain
majority or even consensus on many issues acceptance
related to the Responsibility to Protect, and that in several cases
beyond intergovernmentally agreed to the deal, for example,
cuestién of human rights, international humanitarian law and
maintenance of peace consolidation 0.

Technically a raise error at the 2005 World Summit adoptd
the principle of responsibility to protect. The Summit was established
as a responsibility of States to protect their poblacién of the
genocide, war crimes, ethnic depuraci6n and crimes against
humanity, or which is different. Also, it is legitimized as a duty and a
responsibility for the international community, as appropriate, encourage and
help States to exercise this responsibility.

Mr. President;

They are numerous and legitimate concerns of the cuestidn
Responsibility to Protect (R2P) raises and that can not be ignored.

In this context, just we moved some considerations continuacién
tespecto to the report in the interests of time:

e It is wrong to assert that the Responsibility to Protect is a
principle of international law. The ambigiedades around the
term and possible implications of the exercise of their so-called
three pillars confirm the frank contradictions with the principles of
the United Nations Charter and International Law.

There is no treatment and balanced what is defined as three
pillars of the concept.

and to the importance of addressing the prevention, there is no reference to
raigales causes that generate the situations mentioned, nor
address structural problems that determine the outbreak of
conflicts that scale to extreme situations.

The report places and crimes against humanity (using the term
"Heinous crimes" that does not have a recognized international fi nition)
as a root cause of serious humanitarian emergencies, crisis,
refugee flows, internal displacement and destabilization.

No mention, however, the incidence in these situations
emergency structural causes such as extreme poverty,
hunger, econdémica inequality, food insecurity or
negative consequences of climate change.

and it is strongly promotes the need for resources for
monitoring and early warning in conflict situations and situations
risky; however, it not with violence promotes the strengthening of national capacities for development
econémico of the most backward countries.

and Enel report is not clear who determines that certain situations
They constitute imminent risk for crimes against comisién
humanity. The existence per se of armed conflict, displaced
© refugees, not necessarily determines the occurrence of the
mentioned crimes.

Redefined and the main goal of the responsibility to protect
It is appearing as a concept that reinforces the sovereignty of
States, when really in many ways it is detrimental
this principle.

e It is very worrying that the report seeks support for
UN preventive deployments without specifying _
specifically referred to in these.

and the terminology used in the report departs from the terminology
agreed as to the operations peacekeeping.

"It also is endorsing the recommendations of the Panel
Independent of Peacekeeping Operations. This document has not yet been
debated and much less approved by Member States.

and Enel text of the report is given to intergovernmental Erganos
United Nations and particularly the Security Council,
functions that were not attributed to him.

We could be several hours telling our specific criteria
with respect to each of the paragraphs of this report, but time does not
It allows. Cuba considers that this text is intended to leap very
dangerous in terms of Responsibility to Protect.

Mr. Chairman,

Cuba, a country poor and blockaded, contintia willing to work so
consistent with the international community and the United Nations not
remain indifferent and inactive to genocide, war crimes,
depuracién ethnic and crimes against humanity, but at the same time
insist on the real danger exists that the Responsibility to Protect
end up being manipulated by covert interventionists seeking
Ia justify interference in different ways and use of force