Statement by Denmark at the Informal interactive dialogue on the responsibility of States to protect
their populations
Delivered by H.E. Mr. Ib Petersen, Permanent Representative of Denmark to the United Nations at the
Informal interactive dialogue on the responsibility of States to protect their populations by preventing
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. 8 September 2015.

Check against delivery
Mr. Moderator,
At the outset, we associate ourselves with the statements of the EU and of the Group of Friends of R2P.

First, we wish to thank the Secretary General for an excellent report as well as for his strong personal
commitment to the prevention agenda. Also thanks to the Joint Office of the Prevention of Genocide
and Responsibility to Protect and their two Special Advisers for their continuing and dedicated work on
R2P.

Denmark reaffirms its commitment to paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World Summit Outcome
Document. Prevention is at the heart of R2P and Denmark pledges to continue working towards the full
and effective implementation of all three pillars of R2P.

On this 10th anniversary we should take stock of progress, but also look forward. Important progress
has been made in the first decade in defining and institutionalizing the principle of R2P. In the next
decade our focus should be on the implementation of R2P.

In this context, Denmark would like to share our experiences on national implementation. Denmark has
convened within our government an R2P working group of relevant ministries and agencies to discuss
how to implement R2P within Denmark and in our international relations. We also work with Danish civil
society on the issue, and we are always open to share our experiences with others bilaterally or in fora,
such as the Global Focal Points Network.

The Global Focal Point Network on R2P has now reached 51 Focal Points, including the recently
appointed EU Focal Point. We hope that this latest addition can be a source of inspiration to other
regional organizations to also join the Network. At this point we would like to thank the Global Centre
for R2P on an excellent cooperation on the Network and we look forward to continued cooperation.

Also, in the context of implementation, we would highlight the Framework of Analysis. We support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to integrate elements of the Framework of Analysis into
relevant training and guidance. Denmark will partner with others to integrate R2P into these processes.

We also believe the compendium of practice, once fully developed, will be a significant contribution to
this effort.

The General Assembly needs to continue deliberating on its role in implementing the joint commitment
by our heads of states and governments to prevent atrocity crimes. Denmark therefore supports the
suggestion to adopt a General Assembly resolution reaffirming the responsibility to protect and making
it a formal agenda item for the General Assembly.

We need the continued discussion because R2P does not exist in a vacuum. It is a part of other crosscutting agenda items, such as for example the Secretary-General’s review on UN Peace Operations, the
review of the UN Peacebuilding Architecture, and the Global Study on Women, Peace and Security and
Resolution 1325. We also see important connections to the initiatives of France and the ACT group on
restraining use of the veto in situations of mass atrocities.

In closing, we would like to take the opportunity to express our support for the Human Rights Upfront
Initiative. We applaud the SG’s efforts to improve the system-wide capacity of the UN to prevent and
respond to serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law, which can also
include R2P crimes