Informal interactive dialogue on the
"Report of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect: A vital and enduring
commitment: implementing the responsibility to protect

New York, 8 September 2015

EU STATEMENT
Mr President,

The Candidate Countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia”and Montenegro’, and
the EFTA country Liechtenstein, as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

Thank you for giving the floor to the European Union. We want to thank the Special Advisors
Dieng and Welsh for their briefing and their steadfast work in contributing to a world free of
mass atrocities. We also reiterate our support to your joint office and I am glad to announce
that the EU is joining the Global Network of RtoP Focal Points being the first
intergovernmental regional organization to do so and encourages others to do the same.

Ten years ago Member States recognised the imperative to prevent and halt atrocity crimes
with the adoption of the principle of the Responsibility to Protect at the 2005 World Summit.

Since then a global political consensus has emerged around RtoP as a normative framework to
prevent atrocity crimes, in which States have the primary responsibility to protect their
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Individual Governments as well as international organisations have increasingly referred to
the principle of RtoP as the framework guiding their actions, including the UN Security
Council and the Human Rights Council. It is time for the General Assembly to step up and
reaffirm its commitment.

Citing the principle, the international community has offered assistance to populations in
danger. All in all, the political willingness to act to prevent atrocities has increased — and this
is partly due to the international community’s better understanding of the circumstances in
which atrocities are likely to be committed.

This anniversary allows us to do some stocktaking and to consider lessons learned for the
future. While more needs to be done on structural risk factors, mediation, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention, the concept’s success will also depend on our improved individual and
collective ability to truly and consistently adhere to our responsibility to protect populations in
danger of atrocity crimes. This year's reviews of the Peace Operations, Peacebuilding
architecture and Women Peace and Security show how the concept is now integral part of the
work of the UN.

Yet, despite all the progress in the last decade, we still live in a world where atrocities happen.

In order to honour the historical commitment undertaken by Heads of State and Government
in 2005, much more needs to be done to prevent atrocity crimes. The key word here is
‘prevent’.

* The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania continue to be part of
the Stabilisation and Association Process. Prevention is usually far more effective than dealing with situations where atrocity crimes are
imminent. Our efforts must be focused on identifying the early signs that could lead to the
worsening of a particular situation. In this context, international and regional human rights
mechanisms are a crucial element in the operationalisation of RtoP. We need to improve our
capacities to analyse situations and include relevant findings in our mutual political dialogues
and concerted follow up for preventive action and during all stages of the conflict cycle.

The development of better early warning capabilities can help anticipate risks of potential
atrocities and mobilise resources to respond preventively. The EU early warning system has
been on the forefront in including the risk of atrocity crimes from the beginning. We welcome
the "Framework of analysis for Atrocity crimes” and the future publication of the
compendium of best practices as important elements of the UN’s efforts to strengthen early
warning systems. In this context we wholeheartedly support the SG initiative "Human Rights
up Front”.

The EU particularly emphasises the importance of analysing underlying root causes and
working on mitigating structural risk factors for conflict prevention including for atrocity
crimes. This structural approach often requires long term commitment and investments — be it
on the national or on the international level.

Going from early warning to early action is essential. The primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international peace and security including in
preventing atrocity crimes and upholding accountability is essential in this regard. Its failure
to act in recent cases is a severe disappointment and unfortunate signal to victims. We
therefore call on the members of the Security Council to refrain from voting against a credible
draft resolution on timely and decisive action to end the commission of genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes, or to atrocity crimes and we welcome the work of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group and France in this regard.

We also need to increase cooperation to minimize the means available for committing atrocity
crimes. This includes reducing the availability of small arms and weapons as well as support
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes. The EU welcomes the
achievements of the Arms Trade Treaty and promotes its full universalization.

The International Criminal Court and different transitional justice mechanisms have
contributed to the prevention of atrocity crimes. Domestic capacities have also been enhanced
as many of the States Parties to the Rome Statute have revised their laws to include
criminalisation of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanity. Transitional justice
initiatives have become an essential part of post-conflict peace-building efforts. We call on all
States that have not yet ratified the Rome Statute to do so and to promote its universal
implementation.

Following the firm belief that local and regional initiatives are the best means to prevent and
resolve conflict, the EU further aims at strengthening local and regional capacities for conflict
management. The EU cooperates closely with partners around the world to support ongoing
peace processes, as recently demonstrated in the Malian peace agreement.

The EU stands ready to continue working further on upholding its commitment to RtoP and in
accordance with international law to heed and advance the principle in its actions to prevent and halt atrocity crimes. Ultimately RtoP is about saving lives and protecting populations
from atrocity crimes.