z
~ "Has

+ + Freedom Equality Fraternity
FRENCH REPUBLIC

FRANCE

informal interactive discussion on
Responsibility to protect

Statement by Mr. Francois Delattre
Permanent Representative of France nearby UN

New York, September 8, 2015

Check against delivery

PERMANENT MISSION OF FRANCE TO THE UNITED NATIONS
245 EAST 47TH STREET, NEW YORK, N.Y. 10017 TEL. (212) 702-4900 I thank the President of the General Assembly for organizing this debate and
the Secretary-General's report on the third pillar of R2P. I'm holding
also greet the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, M.

Adama Dieng and the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
Jennifer Welch, I want to acknowledge the commitment and work.

1 - Let me first recall that 10 years ago, in 2005,
responsibility to protect has been devoted in the document of the World Summit
with these three pillars: the primary responsibility of | the state in protecting its
own people, strengthening capacities of States to this end, and I'action
the international community in case of failure of the state. For the atrocities
mass leave deep trauma on the United Nations organization,
the extent of collective responsibility which is that of our organization
such situations.

2- In reality, we act much in the sense that our discussions could
let the sometimes think, by strengthening | rule of law and the fight against
limpunité. The ICC is a prime example. It is based on the principle of
complementarity, and exercises jurisdiction only if | competent State is unable or
he wants to continue the same responsible for the most serious crimes. France
supports the work of the International Criminal Court; we promote
and the universality of the Rome Statute in all international fora,
especially the United Nations Security Council, but in our
bilateral relations.

3 - The responsibility to protect is therefore a principle in action. It must sometimes
be exercised at the threshold of the worst atrocities. We know how reconciliation
RCA will be long 4a following the conflict. The intervention of foreign forces, including the
France, allowed to break the cycle of violence. Today, the fight against
limpunité is central to the country's recovery and it is in this sense that was
adopted the draft Special Criminal Court RCA, the key will be | in support of the
International community. 4- The tragic situations ot the United Nations still remain powerless.

Syria is the most blatant example, if the same presidential statement
17 aodt in support of UN efforts is a signal of hope. The dispute
Syrian has entered its fifth year, the humanitarian situation in the country
dramatic, the flood of refugees is full.

5. Faced with the enormous challenges, it is essential that the Security Council is not
paralyzed. The veto is not a privilege, it is a responsibility. The board
must be able to provide, particularly in situations of atrocities
mass response and take the first mission entrusted to it. It is in this
meaning that France has proposed a concrete step: suspend the use of the veto
in cases of mass atrocities. This would be for the five permanent members
engage on a voluntary and collective basis to waive the use of the veto
when the masses atrocities are found. This initiative meets a
echo off nearby the Member States and civil society, demonstrating its
relevance. I note also, Mr. Secretary General, you put in
before this initiative in your report on the Responsibility to Protect in the
having as an action to prevent concrete atrocities
mass. This can only give credit to the initiative around which
we should all unite.

It is for this reason that France and Mexico have decided to
allow member states supporting this initiative to formalize this support
by signing a Statement of Support. I encourage | all
Member States join, and we thank all those who have already made their
support.

6- The 10th anniversary of the Responsibility to Protect and the 70th anniversary of
Nations must be for us a symbolic moment to work
together to ceuvrer for more efficient operationalization of the principle of
responsibility to protect. I mentioned the ICC and the initiative on the veto carried by
France with Mexico. Other tools exist: the early Il'alerte
commissions surveys, observation missions, mediation and diplomacy
preventive and targeted sanctions. These tools should be used as part of an overall strategy, operational and adapted to each situation. Of the
same manner, we must reflect in detail the requirements for,
in crisis situations, to restore security and respect for the rules of
Rule of law. The joint with the fight against impunity is a key subject this
respect for ceuvrer to rebuild sustainable social fabric and resilience
conflict. As such, further joint work between the work of
Security Council and the International Criminal Court is necessary.

How not to see that, dropping the threshold of acceptability, deconstructs the impunity
entire societies?

7- The new challenges raised by the report of the Secretary-General as the fight
against abuses by non-state armed groups, as Daech we
forced to adapt our strategy against a new threat. Daech repels
frontiers of inhumanity, and is facing what we are called to the
protection. Protection of civilians is evidence, but also our values. A
global strategy and coordinated action are essential. For a ceuvrer
this, France think in this regard it is important that the issue of
Responsibility to Protect be put formally to the agenda

General Assembly.

8 Mr. President, when we talk about the responsibility to protect it
is no question of a concept for a cleave. We're talking about
compass that is the protection of people, a constant concern. By definition,
a principle of action may be always enriched. France will continue to make its

contribution to peacekeeping 4 a time ot the challenges of our
organization - including climate plan - have never seemed as important.