PERMANENT MISSION OF GHANA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
19 East 47TH STREET
New York, N.Y. 10017

TEL. 212-832-1300 © Fax 212-751-6743

Please check against delivery

STATEMENT

BY

MARTHA AMA AKYAA POBEE
AMBASSADOR é& PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF
GHANA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

DURING

THE INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE REPORT OF THE
SECRETARY-GENERAL ON THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

NEW YORK, 8™ SEPTEMBER, 2015 Mr. Moderator,

At the outset let me congratulate the Secretary General for his
very comprehensive report, which covers efforts to implement the
responsibility to protect (R2P) over the last ten years. My delegation
is encouraged by the focus of the report, which reflects a number of
issues of concern to Ghana on the implementation of R2P. The
report reaffirms in the continued relevance of the principle, both as
an expression of political commitment and as a blueprint for action
to prevent and end genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. My delegation supports the framework for
implementation of the principle based on the three equal and
mutually reinforcing pillars of the R2P. The primary obligation of
states to protect their populations and the collective responsibility
of the international community in these efforts as well as strategies
to ensure timely and decisive responses are all key to effectively

meeting the laudable objectives of the principle.

Ghana welcomes the six core priorities spelt out in the report
to guide the implementation of R2P over the next decade. We would
like to emphasize, however, that atrocity crime prevention must not
only be elevated as a core aspect of R2P, but must also be enhanced
through close linkages to related regional and global activities in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and protection of civilians,

particularly the most vulnerable groups. My delegation reaffirms commitment to paragraphs 138 and
139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document on the
Responsibility to Protect. We call for the consistent and balanced
implementation of the principle through the three-pillar framework,
to gain wider acceptance of the R2P concept. Ghana believes that
this is an acceptable and good approach towards building
consensus for a resolution to commemorate the tenth anniversary
of the concept of R2P. More importantly, it will ensure a sincere,

transparent and constructive dialogue on the matter.

Mr. Moderator,

As we take stock of how far we have come in the last ten years ina
bid to chart a path for the future, my delegation acknowledges the
work of the two Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
Responsibility to Protect in the institutionalization of the R2P
concept. We also welcome the publication of the Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes and the Compendium of Practice and
commend the two offices for the good work. In furtherance of such
efforts, we submit for consideration a merger of the two offices with
the aim of ensuring synergy, formality and legitimization of their

remit.

In our condemnation of atrocity crimes, crimes against humanity,
war crimes and genocide, my delegation calls upon the Permanent
Members of the Security Council to exercise good leadership in
situations of these grave crimes and refrain from the use of the

veto. In closing, my delegation welcomes the important reviews that have
been initiated by the Secretary General especially in the area of
peacekeeping operations and the overall UN peacebuilding
architecture. It goes without saying that the important work being
done on issues relating to the protection of civilians, women and
children as well as prevention of sexual violence and mass atrocity
crimes in situations of armed conflict, all lead to sustaining the

principle of responsibility to protect