Permanent Mission of Guatemala to the United Nations
NY
(Collate during his presentation)
STATEMENT BY THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF GUATEMALA TO THE
UNITED NATIONS AMBASSADOR FERNANDO RACE DIALOGUE INFORMAL
INTERACTIVE ON STATE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT THEIR
POPULATIONS by preventing GENOCIDE, WAR CRIMES,
ETHNIC CLEANSING AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(New York, September 8, 2015)
Mr. Moderator,
Let me begin by thanking the Secretary General for presenting his report on the
responsibility to protect (A / 69/981-S / 2015/500). We join the awards to Mr Adama
Dieng and Ms. Jennifer Welsh for his tireless efforts with the responsibility of protect- one
vital and enduring commitment as we remember the title of the report.

As is known, Guatemala has strongly supported the evolving standard called the "responsibility to
to protect". We believe that paragraphs 138 and 139 of the Final Document of the 2005 Summit are
one of the most significant achievements of that meeting and have been keen to advance the translation
a general conceptual framework for specific policiesIn this second decade we consider that we focus on the implementation of this standard. Is
first necessary to interrupt the current practice of annual informal discussions, and more
We work for the next session a formal debate to be held. Second support the
idea of ​​working in a consensual resolution to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the standard in the Final Document of the 2005 Summit, to take stock of the achievements and progress
and simultaneously take action for the medium and long term.

It should be noted that while the Security Council regularly refers to the responsibility to protect
the General Assembly has lagged behind especially since its 2009 resolution promoted at the time
by Guatemala and co-sponsored by seventy delegations. We therefore consider that the time has come for
the General Assembly to legislate appropriate practices and policies that this policy has achieved since its
creation. The responsibility to protect is more urgent than ever, particularly at this time of
great challenges to the systematic killing of civilians ethnically and religiously motivated, continuous
mass atrocities, large numbers of displaced persons and refugees, grotesque sexual violence and
proliferation of non-state actors.

Let me conclude by pointing out that the support of the Secretary-General has been invaluable and the fact that the
responsibility to protect has been a priority during his tenure has helped advance this
rule. We also welcome that this is a priority of the next president of the
General Assembly. Now it is necessary that we give our support to the Special Adviser of the
Secretary General so that their work is institutionalized within the Organization. We must be
consistent and provide the necessary resources so that mandates can be carried out. The actual
funding situation is not sustainable in the face of the future