General Assembly Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect
Statement by Fadi Abi Allam
International Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect
08 September 2015
1. Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to convey my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak at this year’s interactive dialogue. I would
like to thank the Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for moderating this
meeting and Dr. Jennifer Welsh, the Special Adviser for RtoP, for her constructive report and remarks2. My name is Fadi Abi Allam, Executive Director of the Lebanese organization Permanent Peace
Movement and a Steering Committee member of the International Coalition for the Responsibility to
Protect (ICRtoP). The ICRtoP, composed of 89 civil society organizations, is the only global civil society
network working to protect populations by preventing and responding to atrocity crimes through the
implementation of RtoP.

3. Ten years ago, the adoption of the Responsibility to Protect norm in the World Summit Outcome
Document ushered in a new period of hope for governments, civil society, and populations alike. The
inclusion of RtoP signaled optimism that the tragic, inexcusable indifference shown to past atrocities
would no longer be tolerated. It indicated that a new era of courage had arrived, one in which states
would no longer use political expediency to excuse their inaction in the face of the most heinous of
crimes4. Ten years later, we can point to genuine successes and encouraging progress in the implementation
of RtoP through the use of tools under each of its pillars. We have heard, through the annual General
Assembly dialogues, states repeatedly reaffirm their strong commitment to RtoP. We have observed
states beginning to translate this political commitment into action, including through appointing
Focal Points or creating national architectures for atrocity prevention. We have witnessed how lives
can be saved by swift responses to the commission or risk of atrocities, as evidenced in Kenya, Guinea,
Cote d’Ivoire, and Libya.

5. At the same time, we have seen the high costs of not acting on our shared Responsibility to Protect in
countless countries, from South Sudan to Syria to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. I come
from a region where such failure to act in the face of atrocities has had a profoundly tragic impact on
civilians. In Lebanon alone, we have absorbed over 1.1 million refugees displaced by the Syrian civil
war and suffered significant spillover violence in the north, both of which have inflicted serious
economic, political, social, and security tolls. The hundreds of thousands that continue to be impacted
1
across the globe by genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing – the very
crimes that we have vowed repeatedly to prevent – show us that we must do better to ensure that
the initial hope, optimism, and courage engendered by the World Summit was not in vain.

6. Mr. President, it is for this reason that the ICRtoP welcomes this year’s Secretary-General report
assessing progress and challenges in implementing RtoP over the past ten years, as well as priorities
for the future. The ICRtoP would like to emphasize the importance of exploring how RtoP relates to
other issues and sectors which share similar conflict prevention tools and objectives. For instance,
disarmament initiatives that seek to curtail the illicit acquisition, transfer, stockpiling, or use of the
“means” with which atrocities are committed can significantly enhance a State’s ability to fulfill its
RtoP. I just came from the inaugural Conference of States Parties to the Arms Trade Treaty, an
instrument which, if properly implemented, can become an invaluable tool to protect populations by
denying exports of conventional weapons to perpetrators of atrocities.

7. In the same vein, dedicating greater attention to how gender-based human rights violations can serve
as indicators for atrocity crimes—as well as by increasing the voices of women in the
operationalization of RtoP—can ensure stronger implementation of the Women, Peace, and Security
agenda. Understanding these mutual linkages, as well as exploring how existing activities and
programs can explicitly address atrocity crime risks, will lead to a better, more holistic protection of
populations8. Furthermore, the ICRtoP strongly urges States to voice their support for the Security Council
Permanent Members to restrain from using their veto in situations of atrocity crimes. The irresponsible
use of the veto on resolutions attempting to prevent or respond to atrocities has been one of the
major barriers to consistent, timely and decisive implementation of RtoP over the past decade, as
events in my own region grimly demonstrate. Though it may be far from easy, we must all work
collectively to ensure that it does not remain an obstacle in the norm’s next decade. The ICRtoP thus
appeals for States to voice their support for the Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency (ACT)
Group’s “Code of Conduct regarding Security Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity, or war crimes”, as well as for France and Mexico’s political declaration for a regulation on the
use of the veto.

9. Finally, Mr. President, the ICRtoP encourages Member States to seriously consider putting this dialogue
on the General Assembly’s formal agenda. Within such a resolution, we would urge States to reaffirm
their commitment to RtoP, recall the primacy of preventing these crimes, and express support for the
UN Office on Genocide Prevention and RtoP. Importantly, we strongly encourage States to
acknowledge the critical role of civil society in advancing RtoP10. The ICRtoP stands ready to continue to serve as a partner for governments, regional bodies, and the
international community as we all work to advance the Responsibility to Protect into the next decade.

In the case of Syria, the clear perspective of investigating and convicting the persons behind the use of
chemical weapons at the International Criminal Court and the joint support of the whole international
community for such steps is particularly importantIn the case of Syria, the clear perspective of investigating and convicting the persons behind the use of
chemical weapons at the International Criminal Court and the joint support of the whole international
community for such steps is particularly importantIn the case of Syria, the clear perspective of investigating and convicting the persons behind the use of
chemical weapons at the International Criminal Court and the joint support of the whole international
community for such steps is particularly importantIn the case of Syria, the clear perspective of investigating and convicting the persons behind the use of
chemical weapons at the International Criminal Court and the joint support of the whole international
community for such steps is particularly important