informal interactive dialogue of the UN General Assembly

Secretary General's Report
"An essential and constant commitment: setting ceuvre of the responsibility to protect"

New York, September 8, 2015

Statement by HE Ms. Sylvie Lucas
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of Luxembourg

Mr. Moderator,

I thank President Sam Kutesa for convening this informal interactive dialogue of Assembly
General. It gives me the opportunity to reaffirm the full support of Luxembourg 4 for Implementation
the principle of responsibility to protect. Ten years after the 2005 World Summit, this principle
still relevant.

Luxembourg joins the speeches made by the EU and the Netherlands
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the responsibility to protect. A national title, I will present three

comments.

First, the atrocities, war crimes and crimes against humanity that continue to be
committed in Syria, Iraq, Central African Republic or South Sudan should we
bring all has to do more to ceuvre to the principle of responsibility
protect, effective and consistent Fagon. This imperative of the ceuvre implementation is made more
by pressing new challenges for the protection posed by non-state armed groups
such as Daech or Boko Haram.

In his report, the Secretary-General identifies six priorities responsibility to protect
for the next decade. We support these priorities without reservation.

We share in particular and this is my second point, the recommendation of the Secretary
General that prevention must become the rule rather than exception. In this context,
We welcome the publication by the Office of Special Advisers to the prevention of genocide and
for the responsibility to protect the analytical framework of criminal atrocities. We hope this
analytical framework will be integrated into all United Nations peacekeeping activities,
including the training provided to staff of the United Nations prior to deployment and the

theaters of operations. In order to ceuvre responsibility to protect all United Nations system actors
must play their rdle and links should be forged with other themes such cross
that the protection of civilians, children and armed conflict, the fight against sexual violence and

The initiative "above all human rights".

The Commission of peacebuilding as a contribution to 4, ov to the extent it
4 vocation prevent the resurgence of conflicts and 4 prevent the recurrence of atrocities. Luxembourg
is committed in the context of peacebuilding in Cetes Guinea, in order to promote
national reconciliation and strengthen its state institutions.

Finally, and this is my third point we have to react more strongly and more quickly.

The unprecedented crisis prevailing in Syria since March 2011, including the impact on the region and au
Beyond the region continues to worsen, following the displacement of millions of men, women and
children 4 shows how difficult it is for the international community to respond in manner
prompt and decisive when the Security Council is blocked.

The primary responsibility of maintaining peace and international security was granted to
Security Council "to ensure quick and efficient V'action of! Organization", in the words of the Charter
United Nations. The paralysis of the Council when populations are threatened with horrific crimes
lencontre goes to the Charter. For this reason, we welcome and support the initiative launched by Te
France to 4 that the permanent members of the Security Council to refrain from using
veto in cases of mass datrocités. Beyond the permanent members of the Council, all states
members must take responsibility. We therefore encourage all Member States 4
support the code of conduct for action by the Security Council against genocide,
crimes against humanity or war crimes, code of conduct developed by the ACT Group -
Accountability, Consistency, Transparency - and which Luxembourg is a member. It is in our
credibility,

Thank you.