The Permanent Mission to aol ca) 8heoh aa DSLs
of the Kingdom of Morocco E> |
to the United .Wations
New York
Informal interactive dialogue on
Responsibility to Protect
KkKREE
Intervention by the Delegation
the Kingdom of Morocco
New York, September 8, 2015 Mr. President,
My delegation welcomes the convening of this interactive dialogue
which coincides this year with a double celebration: the 70th
anniversary of our Organization and the 10th anniversary of
the commitment of Heads of State and Government for
the responsibility to protectHence the importance of our meeting today that we
will take stock of efforts to
advance the concept of the responsibility to protect.

In this regard, I would like to express the thanks of my
delegation to the Secretary General for the report prepared for
this opportunity and for his introductory remarks that we
give a comprehensive overview on achievements under
each of the three pillars of the responsibility to protectMister President,
The "2005 World Summit" was a key moment for the
concept of responsibility to protect. It reflects the commitment
States to respond to crisis situations in order to
protect people against atrocious crimesIn this regard, my delegation reaffirms its commitment to
paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit, which says
that each state has the responsibility to protect its populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.

Since 2005, and after the publication of the first report
Secretary-General on the implementation of the responsibility of
protect in 2009, this concept has taken a new dimension to
light of recent developments in the world. If the concept
won wider support within the community
International in recent years, it continues
nevertheless raise questions about how best
of lopérationnaliser, while avoiding implementation
and any uncontrolled exploitation or political exploitation
its noble objectives. In this context, my delegation would like to remind the relationship
intersection between the three pillars of responsibility
protect, while emphasizing the primary responsibility
of States to protect their own populations.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the importance that
must be given to preventing the implementation of the
responsibility to protect. In this regard, it is crucial to strengthen
support to States to enable them to strengthen their
national mechanisms for legal protection of populations
strengthening legal instruments and consolidation
democracy and the rule of law. Capacity
building and technical assistance is indeed the best
preventive measures that allow States to create a
environment conducive to the protection of their people
respectiveFinally, my delegation notes with concern the
Information in the report of the Secretary-General
about violations committed by armed groups non-
state, especially when they attack the
sovereignty and national unity of States. My delegation shares
the opinion of the Secretary-General that the international community
will change the way it anticipates, prevents and responds
facing the commission of criminal atrocities to face the
challenges posed by these groups, including by granting more
attention to the prevention of violent extremism and the fight
against terrorismThank you for your attention..

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate that setting
implement the responsibility to protect can not be reached
that through. the consolidation of democracy, the rule of
law and full respect for human rights and
individual and collective freedoms