UN General Assembly
Informal interactive dialogue on the responsibility of States to
protect their populations by preventing genocide, war crimes,

ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity

New Zealand statement

Delivered by H.E. Phillip Taula
Deputy Permanent Representative of New Zealand to the United Nations

8 September 2015

NEW ZEALAND

UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL
2015-16 Page 1 of 3

2015 marks the anniversary of two significant events: the 70"
year of the UN and the 10™ anniversary of the World Summit's

collective commitment to responsibility to protect (R2P).

New Zealand reaffirms its commitment to the principles
outlined in the 2005 outcome document. Then, the entire UN
membership — including over 150 world leaders —- provided an
intellectual and collective reinforcement of R2P. Over the
subsequent decade, this has been strengthened by many
Security Council and Human Rights Council resolutions that
explicitly cite R2P, new international legal instruments such as
the Arms Trade Treaty with its role in reducing unregulated
arms transfers and illicit trafficking which so often fuel atrocity
crimes, and the way in which peacekeeping missions are
increasingly mandated to support host States to protect civilian
populations.

However, when we move from principle to practice, the
shortcomings have been all too apparent. From Syria to Darfur,
we could, and should, do much better. Given these dramatic
failings - and the scale of many of today’s crises - we must be
honest in assessing how - despite our collective words of
commitment — civilian populations continue to be subject to
the violence and terror of atrocity crimes. Page 2 of 3

The Secretary-General’s report points to many areas where
improvements could be made, and efforts redoubled. It
highlights a clear need to prioritise prevention; the valuable
role of civil society in spurring domestic dialogues; promoting
national ownership; and ensuring regional organisations are
adequately involved in early warning and capacity building
activities. We support the Human Rights Up Front Action Plan
and the many other actions in the SG’s important report.

Today I would like to emphasise the importance of timely and
decisive responses, and the role of information flows.

One part of this problem is obvious and well-known, the veto,
and the effect it has on the ability of the UN Security Council to
respond to situations of mass atrocity. We support the
Secretary General’s call on permanent members to exercise
restraint in their use of the veto in situations that include the

commission of atrocity crimes.

On the flow of information, the Secretary-General’s report
recognises that without clear and timely information, we cannot
react and respond to emerging situations. For the UN system to
respond early enough, information needs to be provided rapidly
and widely shared. Page 3 of 3

Advances in this area can be simple. In the Council,
presentational methods can be changed: for example, new
technologies, like infographics, can convey information more
clearly. We support continued improvements in Council working
methods as well, in terms of the use of early-warning and
horizon scanning briefings, and to allow for better flows of
relevant information, for example from Peace Building
Commission chairs.

The lessons of New Zealand’s last Council term and plight of
hundreds of thousands of Rwandans remain all too fresh. The
costs of investing in preventing or responding to atrocity crimes
are insignificant when set alongside the human, political and
financial costs of inaction that flow from our collective failures.