UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, and Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, on the upcoming elections in Myanmar.

(New York, 4 November 2015) The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, and the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, called on the
Government of Myanmar to take all possible measures to ensure that the upcoming elections
of 8 November are held in a peaceful environment.

The Special Advisers expressed concern at the politicization of ethnicity and religion during
electoral campaigning in violation of Article 364 of the 2008 Constitution of the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar. “The promotion of a political agenda that is based primarily on the
protection of a particular religion or ethnic group is dangerous, particularly in a country as
richly diverse as Myanmar”, said the Special Advisers. They raised alarm at reports of
increased advocacy of religious hatred against Muslim minorities by religious groups and
leaders, as well as by members of political parties, noting that such advocacy may constitute
incitement to violence and is prohibited under international law.

While recognizing the importance of the elections for the democratization of Myanmar, the
Special Advisers voiced concerns that the electoral process has resulted in further
marginalisation of religious minorities, in particular Muslim Rohingya. In the last few
months, the Rohingya have been stripped of their right to vote; their freedom of association
has been curtailed, impeding them from forming or joining political parties, and their
representatives are no longer eligible to stand as candidates for seats in Parliament. The
Special Advisers stated that “silencing the voice of one sector of the population brings into
question the integrity of any electoral process.”
They underlined that the Muslim Rohingya population has been subjected to decades of
institutionalized discrimination in law, policies and practice. More recently, four pieces of
legislation, also known as the Protection of Race and Religion Bills, have been adopted in
what the Special Advisers qualified as a clear step backwards for the protection of
fundamental rights in Myanmar, in particular the right to freedom of religion and belief and
women’s rights. According to the Special Advisers, “these bills discriminate against religious
minorities and strengthen a rising Buddhist ultra-nationalist movement that is likely to take
advantage of this opportunity to advance their platform against Muslims. This is unacceptable
in the new Myanmar.”
The Special Advisers concluded: “We would like to make three requests. The first is to the
current Government of Myanmar, to take all possible measures to guarantee that the elections
take place in a climate of freedom, mutual respect and peace. To this end, we urge the
Government to publicly condemn and counter any discourse that incites the population to
discrimination, hostility and violence based on religion or ethnicity, and to take measures
against those responsible. Our second request is to the people of Myanmar: we urge you to
use these elections to show the potential of Myanmar to be a nation of tolerance and peace.

Finally, our third request is to the leaders who will form the new Government of Myanmar.

We call on you to show a commitment to democracy, the rule of law and human rights. This
includes addressing the communal tensions in Rakhine State and developing sustainable
solutions that respond to the concerns and needs of all communities, or face the risk of further
violence and potentially, more serious crimes. Religious minorities, including the Rohingya,
are a part of Myanmar. Building an inclusive and tolerant society is essential for democracy
and long-term peace in the country.”
* *** *

For media queries please contact:
Claudia Diaz
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212-963-35-74; Email: diazc@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to
Protect on the escalation of incitement to violence in Syria on religious grounds.

(New York, 13 October 2015) The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, expressed alarm at the escalation in violent
rhetoric by influential religious leaders in relation to the situation in Syria.

The Special Advisers condemned the recent call by clerics in Saudi Arabia for Sunni
Muslims and their States to support a “holy war” against Shia Muslims and Christians in
Syria, as well as against States and non-State armed groups perceived to support them. “Such
rhetoric can aggravate the already extremely volatile situation in Syria by drawing religiously
motivated fighters to join all parties to the conflict, thus escalating the risk of violence against
religious communities.” They added that “advocacy of religious hatred to incite or justify
violence is not only morally wrong, but also prohibited under international law.”
Dieng and Welsh also expressed concern at reports that Russian Orthodox clerics had earlier
referred to the Russian participation in the conflict in Syria as a “holy battle” against
terrorism. “Statements of this kind can be manipulated, feed suspicion and increase
polarisation of communities.” The Special Advisers noted the response by Russian authorities
who reportedly denied that there was any religious connotation to their involvement in Syria.

They praised the organisation Syrian Christians for Peace for rejecting the concept of a
Christian “holy war” and condemning those who invoke it.

The Special Advisers called on States to dissociate themselves from and condemn any form
of advocacy of religious hatred, promote dialogue and protect and empower all those
religious figures and human rights defenders who are working towards enhancing interreligious respect and harmony.

The Special Advisers also called on religious leaders around the world to refrain from any
form of advocacy of religious hatred and incitement to violence, and to counter any use of
such rhetoric. They stressed that “religious leaders should be messengers of peace, not of
war. In situations in which tensions are high, as in Syria, religious leaders should call for and
foster restraint and dialogue, rather than fanning the flames of hatred.”
* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Sarah Jacquier Nobel
UN Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212-963-3574
Email: jacquier@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, and Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, on accountability and reconciliation in Sri Lanka.

(New York, 17 September 2015) The United Nations Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, called for the
establishment of credible accountability and reconciliation mechanisms for Sri Lanka.

The Special Advisers welcomed the report of the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights Investigation on Sri Lanka that was issued yesterday, and expressed outrage at
the very serious accounts of grave violations – some of them amounting to war crimes and
crimes against humanity – that were allegedly committed between 2002 and 2011 by the
parties to the conflict, namely security forces, affiliated paramilitary groups and the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.

“Sri Lanka has gone through a very dark period of its history during the years of the conflict
which has caused immense suffering for all communities. It is now time for all Sri Lankans to
address the past, to transcend it together and to find a common future. Accountability is not
just a matter of justice; it is also a matter of reconciliation, peace and non-recurrence. The
wounds of the past need to be properly treated and healed in order to write a new peaceful
page in Sri Lankan history,” stated the Special Advisers.

Special Advisers Dieng and Welsh called for the establishment of accountability and
reconciliation mechanisms for Sri Lanka that are inclusive and participatory and that meet
international human rights law standards. “This is a process that will be painful and difficult,
but indispensable for long lasting peace and stability in the country. This process will only be
successful so long as all Sri Lankans trust in its impartiality and independence.”
Special Adviser Welsh highlighted that “the Sri Lankan government has the primary
responsibility to protect its populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. This responsibility entails bringing to account those responsible for
crimes committed but also taking concrete steps to prevent their recurrence.” She encouraged
Sri Lanka to consider assistance from the international community in exercising its
responsibility to protect, particularly considering the culture of impunity that has pervaded
Sri Lankan society and its institutions for many years.

Special Adviser Dieng warned that lingering grievances among Sinhalese and Tamil
communities are eroding the social fabric in Sri Lanka and could pave the way to further
violence. He further stressed that “building trust and reconciliation between both
communities is a long term process that will not happen instantaneously but one that is
needed urgently. The Government must take critical measures to build a society where both
groups understand and respect each other.”
The Special Advisers reiterated the importance of promoting respect for diversity,
intercultural dialogue and non-discrimination, and recommended that the Sri Lankan
government incorporate these priorities into national level policies, including within

educational programs. They also recommended that the government ensure greater
inclusiveness and representation of all ethnic and religious communities within its institutions
and decision-making processes. “The voices of the minorities need to be heard because they
too are Sri Lankan,” the Special Advisers concluded.

* *** *

For media queries please contact:
Sarah Jacquier Nobel
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212-963-3574; Email: jacquier@un.org

.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
Statement by Adama Dieng, UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
Jennifer Welsh, UN Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in
Yemen.

(New York, - 15 September 2015) The UN Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide,
Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, expressed concern at the
ever increasing impact on civilians of the ongoing conflict in Yemen, and the virtual silence
of the international community about the threat to populations.

In the Special Advisers’ view, recent developments are likely to lead to escalation of the
violence in central Yemen, particularly if Sana’a becomes the scene of confrontations
between the Saudi-led military coalition and the Houthi forces, and civilians will bear the
brunt of this violence. “Unless there is a serious commitment of the parties to find a political
solution to the conflict that will end the violence and ensure humanitarian access to all
populations, without discrimination, the situation is likely to degenerate further.”
According to United Nations estimates, at least 2,204 civilians have already been killed, and
4,711 wounded, and civilian objects, such as hospitals, schools and religious buildings,
continue to be targeted. Civilians are protected under international humanitarian law;
indiscriminate attacks and attacks against civilians and civilian objects may constitute war
crimes. The Special Advisers expressed alarm about allegations of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law throughout the country, committed by
both sides of the conflict. Recent incidents of concern include the 2 September suicide terror
attacks against Al-Moayad mosque in Sana’a, the 24 August rocket attack by Houthi
militiamen in Taiz, the 30 August airstrike targeting a bottling plant in northern Haijah
Governorate and the 18 August military strikes on the Red Sea port of Hodeida. It is unclear
how any of these locations could have been considered legitimate military targets. In parallel,
an increased number of incidents of targeting humanitarian organizations in Yemen was
registered. The Special Advisers called on the parties to the conflict to uphold their
obligations to respect international human rights and humanitarian law and protect civilians.

The Special Advisers echoed the report on the situation in Yemen of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights published on 7 September 2015, noting that “there is an urgent need to
establish credible and independent investigations, with relevant jurisdiction and capacity, to
ensure that alleged serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law
by all parties are verified, that perpetrators are held accountable and that victims receive
adequate reparations. The international community should consider all available options,
including encouraging the establishment of an international independent and impartial
mechanism, to support accountability in Yemen. It is imperative that the rights of the victims
are upheld.”
The Special Advisers also denounced the use of sectarian language by the Yemeni branch of
the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula
(AQAP) to justify violations of international law and to fuel divide. In this respect, they
urged leaders from all sides to restrain from manipulating religious identities for political
purposes.

The Special Advisers reminded national authorities of their primary responsibility to protect
the Yemeni population. But they also recalled that the international community has a
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes

against humanity, and “must intensify its efforts to fulfil this collective responsibility in
Yemen.”
For media queries please contact:
The Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Mario Buil-Merce
Phone: +1 917-3675001
Email: buil-merce@un.org

15 September 2015.

**Fulfilling our Responsibility to Protect in Yemen**

By Adama Dieng, UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, and
Jennifer Welsh, UN Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect
According to the latest United Nations estimate, at least 1,916 civilians have
been killed in Yemen since 26 March 2015 as a result of the fighting between the Saudiled coalition, the Houthis, and their respective allies. While both parties are responsible
for the deaths of civilians, the majority have reportedly been killed as a result of air
strikes by the Saudi-led coalition.

The United Nations Secretary-General has repeatedly called on the parties to
comply with their obligation under international humanitarian law (IHL) to protect
civilians. However, reports indicate that there have been continued - and increasingly
blatant - violations of IHL. For instance, human rights organisations found that
indiscriminate attacks on 19 July by pro-Houthi forces against a civilian neighbourhood
in Aden could amount to war crimes. Many of those killed were members of the
marginalized Al-Muhamasheen community. They have also questioned how the
residential compound housing workers in Taiz, which was hit by an air strike on 24 July
that took the lives of at least 73 civilians, could have been considered to be a military
target.

It is legitimate, and vital, to ask such questions. The facts are alarming: since
March of this year, 207 civilian installations have been partially or completely destroyed,
including hospitals, schools, places of worship and private homes. We have been struck
by the virtual silence of the international community on the impact of the conflict on
civilians in Yemen, notably the United Nations Security Council. In addition to bearing
the brunt of the fighting, civilians now face an increasingly dire humanitarian situation
as a result of the conflict. Sieges in a number of governorates have prevented staple
food items from reaching civilians, and airstrikes have reportedly targeted local markets
and trucks laden with food items. Reports suggest that, in some cases, limiting access to
food may even have been used as a military strategy - in what was already one of the
poorest and least developed countries in the world. Unless there is a serious
commitment of the parties to cease violence, allow humanitarian access and agree on
steps towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict, the situation is likely to degenerate
further and increase the suffering of civilians.

As the fighting draws on, with tribal groups and communities taking sides, we
fear that identity issues may become a part of the narrative of the parties to the conflict.

The Yemeni branch of the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and AlQaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) are exploiting the security vacuum in Yemen to
extend their influence and control. They use sectarian arguments to justify their
atrocities. As a result, there is a growing risk that civilians, in particular minorities living
in Yemen and in neighbouring countries, could be targeted based on their identity. On
29 July, ISIL claimed responsibility for a car bomb that targeted the Al Faydh Alhatemy
mosque in eastern Sana’a, attended by the Ismaili Shi’ite minority. ISIL claimed that it
had targeted Ismailis in revenge for their alleged support to the Houthis. Continued and
increasingly localized violence could lead to a scenario in which larger sections of
communities are drawn into the fighting on the basis of their identity.

Since the uprisings of 2011, the people of Yemen have made determined efforts
to resolve their differences through political dialogue. However, this resolve is being
seriously tested. The parties to the conflict must be reminded of their obligation under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians. We urge them to take all possible
measures to prevent incitement to violence and sectarian reprisals. The media has the
responsibility to refrain from fueling divisions based on identity and, instead, to
promote respect for diversity. The international community also has a responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, and must intensify its efforts to fulfill this responsibility. In addition,
escalating tensions in Yemen may have regional security implications that the
international community cannot afford to ignore or underestimate. We must,
collectively, make the protection of the civilian populations of Yemen our primary
consideration if we are to avoid a catastrophe in this region.

****
14 August 2015
For media queries, please contact:
Davide Zaru, Political Affairs Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Email: zaru@un.org – osapg@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, and Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in Yemen
(New York, - 9 April 2015) The Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, expressed
concern at the dramatic and deteriorating situation in Yemen.

The Special Advisers expressed alarm at the impact on the civilian population of the military
operations initiated by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on 26 March 2015 at the request of the
Government of Yemen and supported by other Member States. They also expressed alarm at the
widespread, lethal attacks by Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) and the Houthis, as
well as other armed actors associated with them.

They expressed shock that protected groups, such as health workers, and civilian objects, such as
medical and education facilities and private homes, have been hit by indiscriminate attacks in the
course of the fighting. They reminded all parties that these sites are protected under international
law and attacks against them could constitute war crimes.

The Special Advisors deplored the number of casualties since the escalation of violence, which
have reportedly amounted so far to more than 300 civilians, including a large number of
children. They also denounced the civilian casualties that resulted from airstrikes on the AlMarzaq camp in Hajjah province (Western Yemen) on 30 March 2015, a camp that was
primarily housing internally displaced persons.

They echoed the call made by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to all parties
involved to respect their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and
ensure the protection of civilians and of United Nations, other humanitarian and associated
personnel.

Special Advisers Dieng and Welsh noted with concern that sectarian tensions are increasing in
Yemen, as demonstrated by media reports of calls by religious leaders in the Aden Governorate
on 8 April for followers to engage in a holy war, and by the horrific 20 March bomb attacks at
two mosques in the capital, Sana’a, and in Saada (north-western Yemen). The dire humanitarian
situation and scarcity of basic supplies, including food and water, risks further increasing
tensions. They warned, too, of the risk that sectarian tensions could spill over into the region,
exacerbating an already tense environment.

The two Special Advisers noted that since the uprisings of 2011, the people of Yemen have made
determined efforts to resolve their differences through political dialogue. However, this resolve
is being seriously tested with the deepening sectarian divide and by the reported use of identity
issues by parties to the conflict for political gain.

They stated: “The region is facing a critical moment. We call on the parties involved in the crisis,
including decision-makers, political parties and groups, military, religious, tribal and community
leaders, to take all possible measures to prevent sectarian reprisals amid the ongoing violence, to
engage constructively in peace initiatives, and to promote respect for diversity.”
1

They reminded Member States of the commitment made by all Heads of State and Government
at the 2005 World Summit to help protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, and to cooperate in fulfilling their collective
responsibility to protect populations.

Special Advisers Dieng and Welsh stressed that the protection of populations affected by the
escalating violence in Yemen must be a priority for the international community, with special
attention given to the situation of the most vulnerable groups, such as women, children,
internally displaced persons and minorities, including smaller religious groups such as Ismailis.

For media queries please contact:
Davide Zaru
Political Affairs Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 3573
Email: zaru@un.org

2.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, and Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect, on the situation in Yarmouk, Syria
(New York, 09 April 2015) The Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, express deep concern
about the deteriorating situation of besieged civilian populations in Yarmouk, where more than 18,000
Palestinian and Syrian civilians, including 3,500 children, are trapped by renewed fighting for
territorial control among different armed groups, including the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). The alleged aerial bombardments by Syrian security forces of residential areas in
Yarmouk represent an additional threat to the safety of the civilians trapped in Yarmouk.

The Special Advisers strongly condemned the ongoing fighting. “We have received reliable reports
that civilians have been killed. In addition, the fighting has worsened the already dire humanitarian
situation in Yarmouk, with people left without access to water, food or medicine. Having survived
more than two years of a siege by government forces, thousands of civilians are now being held
hostage in a battle zone and face death as a result of the dire conditions and the fighting.” The Special
Advisers reiterated calls for an immediate cessation of hostilities, unimpeded access of humanitarian
actors to Yarmouk and safe passage out of the area for civilians wishing to leave. They appealed to all
parties to abide by their obligations under international humanitarian and human rights law and
underlined the obligation to protect civilians at all times.

The Special Advisers noted that all parties to the conflict in Syria, including the Syrian Government,
non-State armed groups, extremist and listed terrorist groups such as ISIL and the Al Nusra Front,
have reportedly committed grave violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law that may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. They called on all
actors with influence in Syria to ensure the protection of the civilian populations and avert the
possibility of further atrocity crimes.

The Special Advisers recalled the commitment by all Heads of State and government in 2005 to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and to
cooperate in fulfilling their collective responsibility to protect. The Special Advisers stressed the
primary responsibility of the Syrian Arab Republic to protect its populations from atrocity crimes and
expressed concern at its continued failure to do so.

However, they emphasized the parallel responsibility of the international community to take timely
and decisive action to protect populations in Syria. “The Security Council bears particular
responsibility to end the bloodshed and to ensure the protection of civilians. Member States must
overcome their differences and seek new ways to protect civilians in Syria. The international
community cannot continue to fail the people of Syria”, stated the Special Advisers.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
The Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Sarah Jacquier Nobel
Phone: +1 212-963-3574
Email: jacquier@un.org