Señor moderador:
1. Al dar la bienvenida al séptimo informe del Secretario General sobre la
responsabilidad de proteger (A/69/981) -titulado “Un compromiso vital y
perdurable: hacer efectiva la responsabilidad de proteger”-, mi delegación saluda
la realización del presente diálogo interactivo cuyos propósitos son particularmente
relevantes en estos momentos en que atravesamos una de las más grandes crisis
de refugiados de las últimas décadas. El Perú, en tal sentido, hace un llamado
para que este diálogo permita dar paso a una verdadera reflexión y auto-crítica
sobre las causas de fondo de los actuales conflictos.

2. Al conmemorar los 10 años de la Cumbre Mundial 2005, el Perú reafirma su
compromiso con el principio de la responsabilidad de proteger, tal como fue
articulado en los párrafos 138-139 del Documento Final de dicha Cumbre
(A/RES/60/1). Sirva esta ocasión, en consecuencia, para renovar el pleno apoyo
de mi delegación a la labor que desempeña tanto el Asesor Especial del Secretario
General para la Prevención del Genocidio, Adama Dieng, como la Asesora
Especial para la Responsabilidad de Proteger, Jennifer Welsh.

3. Deseo en primer término reiterar la convicción del Gobierno del Perú de que la
responsabilidad de proteger no está concebida para socavar, sino para reforzar la
soberanía de los Estados y el principio de igualdad soberana consagrado en la
Carta de San Francisco. No podemos olvidar que la responsabilidad de proteger
incumbe principalmente al Estado.

4. About how to promote the principle of responsibility to protect the
practice, taking into account the six proposed priorities for the next
SG decade, Peru would like to highlight three themes: i) how to demonstrate greater
Political compromise; ii) how to improve prevention; and iii) how to ensure
more timely response.

Political compromise
5. The Government of Peru, through close coordination between the Ministries of
Foreign Affairs and Justice and Human Rights is a
continuous process of reflection on the institutionalization of their commitment to
the principle of R2P.

6. participate as observers of the Latin American Network for the Prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities and on regional and global meetings
on the subject, including the V Annual Meeting of the Global Network Points
Focal, held in Madrid, on 23 to 24 June 2015. It should be noted,
in the same way that Peru has welcomed the recent appointment of a
focal point in the European External Action Service, the European Union,
important development that we hope will be considered in other organizations
regional.

7. At the multilateral level, Peru expresses its political commitment to the principle
R2P, co-sponsoring the resolution -for example- "Preventing Genocide" in the
Human Rights Council; the resolution on the "International Day

commemoration and dignity of victims of crimes of genocide and
prevention of this crime "to be adopted on 10 September; and the
GA resolution on the Report of the International Criminal Court. In relation
this judicial institution, which plays a fundamental role in the fight against
impunity for heinous crimes, our Minister of Foreign Affairs has
I agreed to join the Informal Ministerial Network Support Criminal Court.

Prevention
8. Peru, Mr. President, also attaches great importance to the appearance
preventive R2P principle is essential in the case of Latin America. In this sense,
the Peruvian State reiterates the importance of the human rights approach
They should be all public policies. Therefore, we have adopted, in addition to the
National Human Rights Plan (2014-2016), the National Education Plan
on Fundamental Rights and Duties of 2021. The latter seeks, among other
purposes, ensure education of young people in a culture of peace, which are corrosive
groups extreme violence.

9. In the same context, the Peruvian government has created, in 2013, the Commission
National Discrimination which seeks to prevent this problem that
It can also lead to situations of serious violations of rights
humans.

10. It is also important to highlight the work of the Human Rights Council,
framework in which Peru supports various proposals that contribute to the objectives
of the principle of R2P. For example, it supports resolutions concerning the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and the rights of groups most
vulnerable. On vulnerable populations, Peru has signed major
treaties such as the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict.

more timely and decisive response
11. Peru reaffirms its commitment to peacekeeping, facilitating the
peacekeeping operations of the United Nations military and civilian components
necessary to respond in a timely manner to situations where there is
risk of heinous crimes committed.

12. At the same time, I must say that the Government of Peru feels that the capacity
response of the Security Council to the current serious crisis, reflects the
need to reform its working methods, including those related to the use
of the veto. Therefore, the Peru-in this year of the 70th anniversary of the NNUU- decides
support the initiative of France, raised jointly with Mexico, of
frame the veto power of the permanent members of the Council should
of mass atrocities; and, in the same context- also it supports the initiative of the
ACT group, led by Liechtenstein on a Code of Conduct for
Council vote. Both initiatives, the complement each other, require
at the highest political body of the UN greater accountability, coherence and
transparency in their actions.

13. On the other hand, my delegation has welcomed the announcement of the next
publication of the compendium of practice compiled by the Special Adviser to the
R2P, the same that we hope will include the best practices referred to in
particular to the third pillar. As we know, it is necessary to clearly identify the
wide range of options available under the third pillar, different force
military.

New challenges
14. New challenges have been adequately identified in the report: groups
Non-state armed, and new technologies. Peru has expressed in various
Sometimes its rejection and condemnation of acts of terrorist groups like state
Boko Haram Islamic. On the other hand, with respect to new technologies, it is
essential to take measures to prevent the spread of violent extremism to
through the internet and social networks, while safeguarding the freedom of
expression and opinion.

Mr. Moderator:
15. reaffirming the support of Peru to the principle of responsibility to protect and its
continued consolidation, we renew our appreciation for the vital work
of Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide, and for
Responsibility to Protect, including its efforts to have an approach
R2P uniform at all levels of the Secretariat of the United Nations
together. His work, we believe, makes the difference in order to channel
the efforts of the international community in preventing atrocities of
mass