V/
NSEZ Le
STATEMENT BY
H.E. EINAR GUNNARSSON, PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF ICELAND TO THE UNITED
NATIONS

ON BEHALF OF

H.E. SAM K. KUTESA, PRESIDENT OF THE 697%
SESSION OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

AT

THE INFORMAL INTERATIVE DIALOGUE ON THE
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

8 SEPTEMBER, 2015

 

[Please check against delivery) | Excellencies,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Distinguished delegates,

Ladies and gentlemen,

I am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the President of
the General Assembly, H.E. Sam K. Kutesa, at this year’s Informal
Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect.

Today’s event is an opportunity to reaffirm our collective
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,

ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

A decade after the World Summit, the principle of responsibility to
protect continues to receive recognition by Member States, regional
mechanisms and other stakeholders. Continued engagement is
required for its wider acceptance and implementation, in

accordance with international law.

In this context, the continued engagement of the General Assembly,
through its annual informal interactive dialogues, is a step in the
right direction. However, the informal nature of this interactive
dialogue suggests that there is still work to be done, among Member
States and other stakeholders, to generate increased awareness and

consensus. In so doing, we must remind ourselves that the primary
responsibility to protect populations from these crimes lies with
state authorities, and that due attention should be given to
prevention. Regional and international efforts in this regard,
therefore, should focus on supporting national capacities in
detecting and preventing these crimes, including supporting
national judicial systems, especially in conflict and post-conflict

situations.

Excellencies,

While the scale of these crimes has gradually reduced, the
international community continues to witness situations around
the world, especially by non-state groups and actors that constitute
some of these crimes against humanity. The heinous atrocities and
terrorist attacks by groups such as ISIS, Boko Haram, Al-qaeda and

Al Shabab are unacceptable, and must double efforts to stop them.

This past May, during a High-Level thematic debate, the General
Assembly reiterated the importance of strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and _ sub-regional
organizations. This effort should be extended to the principle of
responsibility to protect, especially with detection and prevention of
crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against

humanity. Efforts by the international community will also require long-term
and more targeted support for societies recovering from these

crimes.

This informal dialogue provides an opportunity for Member States
to consider how to advance the principle of the responsibility to
protect with a view to addressing existing and emerging challenges,
as well as deepening collective understanding of the responsibility
to protect. Let us remain steadfast in furthering the dialogue on this

matter