Monsieur le Président, je vous remercie. Unofficial translation
Mr. President,
1 thank you for convening this important debate. The responsibility to protect populations
from genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing is a topic that
deserves our full and ongoing attention. We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
submitted for our consideration and we believe it clearly describes the most pressing
challenges ahead. We fully agree with the six priorities it identifies. We would also like to take
the opportunity to commend the work of the Office of the Special Advisers on Prevention of
Genocide and responsibility to protect, or R2P. We would like to see its expertise drawn
upon for the United Nations’ broader early warning efforts, including when it comes to
averting electoral violence. We also support a more institutionalized dialogue on R2P in the
UN General Assembly context.

Mr. President, during the ten years after the Millennium Summit the crucial importance of
protection has been recognised on the international level, and yet ongoing conflicts
demonstrate that there are still major challenges to overcome. We therefore fully agree with
the Secretary General's assessment in the report that the concept of R2P is in fact at a
turning point: we, the member states, need to shift our focus away from the conceptual
groundwork and towards the practical implementation of the norm. It is vital that we jointly
continue to ensure that the notion of "sovereignty as responsibility" is translated into specific
action that makes a difference on the ground.

Mr. President, | would like to briefly look at three topics where we believe concrete
achievements are possible:
Firstly, the member states of the ACT (Accountability, Coherence, Transparency) group
propose a Code of Conduct which requires that Security Council members, both permanent
and elected, should not vote against Council resolutions aiming to prevent or put an end to
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes. The ACT members are currently
circulating this Code among the member states and asking them to give it their official
support. Switzerland encourages all member states to support and adhere to this CodeSecondly, we would like to raise the focus on prevention of mass atrocities as a core
aspect of R2P, which was identified as one of the six priorities in the Secretary General's
report. The ongoing reviews of peace operations and the peacebuilding architecture offer
several interesting ideas that could lead to meaningful changes in order to make peace
operations across the spectrum more effective, better able to address the challenges of
contemporary conflicts, and pave the way for peace, stability and development. Switzerland
very much welcomes the fact that the high-level independent panel on peace operations
(HIPPO)'s report mentions that "the prevention of armed conflict is perhaps the greatest
responsibility of the international community and yet it has not been sufficiently invested in".

The necessity for such prevention efforts is also clearly highlighted in the peacebuilding
architecture review. These reviews are a milestone and we invite member states to back
undertakings to strengthen prevention, such as supporting the funding and back-stopping
arrangements of UN special political missions. The costs of ending a conflict are many times
higher than the costs of preventing one. The prevention of coniflicts is therefore an obligation
of all states and must not be subject to political considerations and state interests. Finally, the Global Action Against Mass Atrocity Crimes or GAAMAC initiative, which we
believe perfectly reflects the fifth and sixth priority and follows the first recommendation
outlined in paragraph 73 of the Secretary General's report. Switzerland launched GAAMAC
in 2013 with the participation of the Office of the Special Advisers, several NGOs and
together with Argentina, Australia, Denmark, Costa Rica and Tanzania. This initiative is an
inclusive, state-led voluntary network of partners that support, are interested in or are
involved in atrocity crimes prevention. In particular its aim is to support states that wish to
develop national architectures, favouring knowledge-sharing and peer-to-peer exchangesMr. President, the conceptual framework of R2P has come a long way since the Millennium
Summit. At this turning point, however, the theory needs to be put into practice.

The first GAAMAC international meeting, which took place in March 2014 in Costa Rica,
brought together 52 countries. A second meeting — focusing on the concrete set-up of
national architectures — is planned for early 2016. We very much hope that this initiative will
make a significant contribution to ongoing prevention efforts and invite all member states to
participate