REMARKS BY TUVAKO N. MANONGI, AMBASSADOR AND PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA TO THE UNITED
NATIONS, AT THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE

ON THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT, 8 SEPTEMBER 2015

Mr. Moderator,

We thank the President of the General Assembly for convening this informal interactive
dialogue. Advancing the principle of the responsibility to protect toward a common
universal consensus is in the interest of the humanity we all share. It must be made clear;
States have the primary responsibility to protect. However, when they are unable or
unwilling, the international community has the responsibility to protect the human dignity
and rights of people everywhere. It is a principle worthy embedding as customary

practice.

Admittedly, progress toward that objective has been slow but incremental. Since the 2005
World Summit, the principle has received recognition from the Member States, regional
organizations and other stakeholders, including through various resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. This very dialogue attests both to this fact

and to the need to further articulate and embrace the principle.

While welcoming these developments, it must be underscored that the primary
responsibility to protect populations from heinous and other crimes rests with Member
States. In this regard, it is incumbent upon us to build the requisite national resilience to
these egregious crimes. This endeavour entails the promotion of a culture of tolerance
and mutual respect — of human rights, the rule of law and responsible governance — as
well as of equality and social justice. It is imperative that the commitment to prevent

these crimes should be reflected in the national policies, laws and administrative actions.

Whereas the primary responsibility for prevention lies with Member States, regional and
sub-regional arrangements can play an important complimentary role in prevention and
protection, owing to their geographical proximity and knowledge of historical and
political conditions that give rise to such crimes. The United Nations must support these
mechanisms to build and strengthen capacities for early detection and prevention. In this

regard, cooperation with the regional organizations, such as the African Union, is pivotal. Despite its growing recognition, there have been several occasions, where the
international community had failed to live up to its commitment to prevent these crimes.

Indeed, there have been situations whereby the application of the principle caused more
harm than good. On all these occasions, the words contained in the preamble of the
Charter of the United Nations, namely “... to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war” rang hollow. This is simply unacceptable, We must therefore do more, as
an Organization and as a community of nations, to combat impunity and ensuring

accountability.

Mr. Moderator,

In conclusion, permit me to make the following observations:

First, the on-going migrants crisis in Europe is a global challenge. The collective
responsibility to protect encompasses all populations in all circumstances. Migrants
escaping conflicts in Libya, Syria and elsewhere deserve protection and compassion in
accordance with international humanitarian and human rights law. For the United
Republic of Tanzania, a country that has harboured refugees for generations, we
recognize that international cooperation is vital in addressing their plight. We must thus

strengthen and promote the principle of burden sharing.

Second, we strongly believe that the principles of international law, including those
concerning friendly relations and cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter are critical in understanding, interpreting and implementing the principle of
responsibility to protect. For that matter, it cannot be promoted or appreciated selectively

or in isolation.

Finally, we support efforts being undertaken to promote awareness, integrating atrocity
crime perspective into national policy, and fostering cooperation among Member States

and with other stakeholders. To this end, national ownership is invaluable