Check against delivery

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Karel J.G. van Oosterom
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
the United Nations

On behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
at the “Arria” formula meeting of the UN Security Council on the
“Responsibility to Protect and non-state actors”

NEW YORK, 14 December 2015

Statement by the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to
Protect at the “Arria” formula meeting of the UN Security
Council on the “Responsibility to Protect and non-state
actors”
Mr President,
I have the honour of delivering this statement on behalf of the 50
Members of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect,
co-chaired by the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of
Rwanda.

The Group of Friends congratulates Chile and Spain for convening
this timely Security Council “Arria” format discussion on the
Responsibility to Protect (R2P). We welcome the holding of the 5th
Annual Meeting of the Global Network of R2P Focal Points in Spain
in June 2015, the outcomes of which served as the basis for the
letter of 22 October from Chile and Spain, and this meeting today.

R2P is a vital principle for the Security Council’s work. The tenth
anniversary of the unanimous endorsement of R2P at the 2005 UN
World Summit comes at a critical time. As the Council itself has
done, including in resolutions 2150 and 2171, we reaffirm our
enduring commitment to paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World
Summit Outcome Document on the Responsibility to Protect.

In the face of the number and severity of mass atrocities taking
place globally, R2P has never been more relevant. These atrocities
are being perpetrated not only by States but, increasingly, also by
non-state actors – such as Daesh and Boko Haram.

The continuing rise of non-state violent extremist groups with
transnational reach, which deliberately commit atrocities for the
purpose of promoting their cause, represents a dangerous shift in
conflict dynamics and a challenge to the norms which underpin our
safety and security. Tackling this scourge will require concerted,
coordinated, consistent and sustained international efforts.

First and foremost, states must meet their responsibility – under
R2P’s Pillar 1 – to protect their populations from atrocity crimes.

This includes making all possible efforts – in a manner consistent
with their international humanitarian law and human rights
obligations – to limit the ability of non-state groups to violate
international humanitarian law and abuse human rights. Weak
governance, an absence of the rule of law, political instability,
impunity and human rights abuses create fertile ground for the rise
of violent extremists.

The international community must also meet its responsibilities
under R2P Pillar 2, by assisting States to enable them to fulfil their
responsibility to protect their populations from atrocity crimes. We
note that non-state actors, such as international NGOs, civil society
organizations, community and religious leaders, media and the
private sector can have a positive role in assisting States in
upholding their primary Responsibility to Protect.

As a global community, we must make clear to non-state armed
groups that we will seek to ensure that they be held to account for
the crimes they commit. And we must act on these words by taking
concrete steps to end impunity if we are to deter such acts. The
Security Council has an important role in this regard.

States must also ensure that their armed forces comply with
international humanitarian law and do not commit mass atrocities,
regardless of how lawless the non-state armed groups they face as
opponents may be.

There may be circumstances where actions under R2P’s Pillar 3 are
required to address the threat of non-state armed groups. As the
Secretary-General has highlighted in his various annual reports on
R2P, there is a spectrum of options available to the Security Council
in such circumstances. These actions should be embedded within
comprehensive, sustainable, political strategies and seek to
strengthen the role of the State to tackle the threat posed by nonstate armed groups.

The Responsibility to Protect places a particular responsibility on the
members of the Security Council. The Group of Friends of R2P
advocates for timely and decisive action by the Security Council in
order to prevent or end atrocity crimes.

The challenge of addressing the commission of mass atrocities by
non-state armed groups is exacerbated when these groups are able
to mobilize, radicalize or recruit individuals from abroad. In order to
meet their Responsibility to Protect, and in keeping with Resolutions
of the Security Council, member states should take action, in a
manner consistent with their obligations under international human
rights law, to prevent their nationals from becoming foreign terrorist
fighters.

Taking action consistent with R2P also requires all of us to counter
violent extremism. The Council and the international community
should focus on prevention and be alert to the early warning signs.

We recognize and support the important work of the Office of the

Special Advisers on Genocide Prevention and R2P. The UN’s
Framework of Analysis on Atrocity Crimes is a useful tool in this
regard. Early warning signs should be translated to early action
through the various options set out in this meeting’s concept note.

While we develop strategies to protect populations from violent
extremists, we must also tackle the drivers of violent extremism to
commit mass atrocities. Building strong and resilient communities is
key to preventing and addressing violent extremism at the
grassroots level. States need to engage with their civil societies
both at home and abroad to enlist them in this collective endeavour.

As part of the continuum, it is vital that societies are rebuilt in a
more resilient fashion in the aftermath of those crimes.

The challenges posed by non-state armed groups require the
Council to consider all the tools available to it. The Responsibility to
Protect provides crucial guidance for determining the most
appropriate tools in a particular situation, and we reiterate our call
for the full and effective implementation of all of its three pillars. We
again thank Chile and Spain for convening this debate on R2P and
stand ready to assist the Council in its endeavours.

check against delivery

Open Debate Security Council

Statement on behalf of The Group of Friends on the Responsibility to
Protect at the UN General Assembly Informal Interactive on the
Responsibility to Protect

H.E. Karel J.G. van Oosterom
Co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the United
Nations

NEW YORK, 8 SEPTEMBER 2015

Mr. President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the 49 Members of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, co-chaired by the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and the Republic of Rwanda.

The Group of Friends thanks the President of the General Assembly for convening
this Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect (R2P). We also
commend the Secretary-General for his deep personal commitment to the principle.

Mr. President, we note that the adoption of R2P at the United Nations (UN) World
Summit ten years ago was an historic commitment to prevent and protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.

In keeping with the 10th anniversary of the 2005 World Summit and the 70th
anniversary of the UN, we reaffirm our enduring commitment to paragraphs 138
and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document on the Responsibility to
Protect.

We welcome the considerable and undeniable progress that has been made since
2005. From the establishment of the UN Office on Genocide Prevention and R2P to
the development of the Human Rights Up Front Initiative, the UN Secretariat has
taken important steps to enhance its capacity to address atrocity crimes. We also
note the considerable steps taken by many Member States, as well as the progress
made by many regional and sub-regional organizations, to further advance R2P.

Furthermore, we take note that the Security Council has adopted over 30
resolutions referencing R2P, while the Human Rights Council has adopted 13 such
resolutions. We stress that it is important for the General Assembly to fully consider
R2P, including by adopting a resolution marking the 10th anniversary and
reaffirming its commitment to the principle that the international community should
never submit to the politics of indifference and inaction. We also call for R2P to be
moved onto the formal agenda of the General Assembly.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report and we strongly encourage Member
States to take stock of efforts to implement R2P, as well as to assess their own
capacities and strategies to uphold the principle. We reiterate our intent to
strengthen our political commitment to the principle’s objectives, to invest in
prevention, and to ensure more timely and decisive response to early warning
signs, consistent with the priorities identified in the Secretary-General’s report.

The report gives welcome attention to the threat of non-state armed groups and
the challenges they pose for the implementation of R2P. We recall that, while
groups that commit atrocity crimes are ultimately responsible for their heinous acts,
we must remember that each state bears the primary responsibility to protect its
populations from such crimes.

Mr. President, we take this opportunity to reaffirm our full support for the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, Mr.

Adama Dieng and Dr. Jennifer Welsh. We strongly encourage Member States to
continue supporting their work and that of their Office.

The Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes can be a useful guide for assessing
the risk of atrocity crimes, and could serve as an important tool for mainstreaming
atrocity prevention in the UN as well as assisting Member States to strengthen their
own capacities and strategies. We encourage Member States to make use of the
Framework and support that it be integrated into training for relevant UN Peace
Operations.

We welcome the important reviews on UN Peace Operations, the UN Peacebuilding
Architecture, and on Women, Peace and Security and Resolution 1325, and we
reaffirm the links between these cross-cutting agenda items with efforts to prevent
atrocity crimes and uphold R2P.

The Group of Friends reiterates the significance of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and strongly encourages States that
have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention to do so as a matter of high
priority. We encourage consideration by Member States to ratify other relevant

international legal treaties, and further reaffirm our commitment to ensure
accountability for genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.

We welcome the holding of the 5th Annual Meeting of the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points in Spain in June 2015. We commend the 50 Member States of the UN
that have appointed a National R2P Focal Point, and we encourage all Member
States and regional organizations to heed the Secretary-General’s call for an
expansion of atrocity prevention networks.

Finally, we recognize the important role of civil society in supporting the
advancement of R2P.

As we look to the 70th anniversary of the UN next month, we pledge to take
determined action to meet the priorities identified by the Secretary-General in his
report. We further call for the full and effective implementation of all three pillars of
R2P, and we recommit ourselves to the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Mr. President, I conclude by encouraging all Members of the United Nations to do
the same