UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect,
the Special Rapporteur on Minority Issues and the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of
Religion or Belief, on the situation in Syria
(New York, 12 June 2015) The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, the Special Rapporteur on Minority Issues, Rita Izsák, and the
Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief, Heiner Bielefeldt, strongly condemned
the increased number of government aerial attacks in Syria and the use of indiscriminate
weapons, such as barrel bombs, including in civilian populated areas. They warned that such
attacks could escalate retaliatory action by non-state armed groups, and consequently,
increase the vulnerability of religious and ethnic minorities perceived to support the
government.

“Government air strikes have reportedly killed more than a hundred civilians in the past
week. Employing means or methods of combat which cannot distinguish civilian from
military objectives is a clear violation of international humanitarian law. Not only has the
Government of Syria failed in its responsibility to protect its populations from atrocity
crimes, but it continues to attack its own people.” The Special Advisers and the Special
Rapporteurs urged the Government to abide by its obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law.

The Special Advisers and the Special Rapporteurs raised alarm about the broader
consequences of the aerial attacks by government forces for particular communities in Syria.

They warned that as a result of those strikes, non-state armed groups could carry out large
scale reprisal attacks against religious and ethnic minorities perceived to be associated with
the government, including Shia civilians who live in the besieged villages of Al Fu’aha,
Kefraya, Nbul and Zahra in Aleppo and Idleb governorates, and Druze communities
concentrated in As Suwayda governorate. If protection measures are not taken urgently, they
stressed, entire communities risk paying the price of this conflict.

In addition, the Special Advisers and the Special Rapporteurs reiterated their concern about
the on-going threat to the safety of minority groups in Syria, including Alawites, Armenians,
Assyrians, Druze, Ismailis and Kurds, who are being killed, persecuted or otherwise targeted
- primarily by non-state armed groups, including Jabhat al Nusra and the so-called “Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant” - on the basis of their religious or ethnic identity. “We call on
all parties to respect international human rights and humanitarian law and immediately stop
targeting people on the basis of who they are or what they believe and to do everything, in
action as well as in words, to prevent further rifts and escalation of tensions along sectarian
lines.”
The Special Advisers and the Special Rapporteurs also condemned advocacy of racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to violence in the traditional and social media
against ethnic and religious minorities in Syria. In particular, they expressed outrage at recent
speeches and media articles that dehumanise Alawites and Christians and call for their

conversion, or death. They recalled that incitement to violence is prohibited under
international law.

All parties to the conflict, including the Syrian Government and non-state armed groups, are
alleged to have committed grave violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law in Syria that may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. The Special
Advisers and the Special Rapporteurs denounced the prevailing culture of impunity in Syria
and warned that “it must be made very clear to everyone carrying a gun, or holding a
command position, that perpetrators of atrocity crimes in Syria will be held to account.”
The Special Advisers and the Special Rapporteurs recalled the commitment by all Heads of
State and Government at the 2005 World Summit to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, including their incitement, and to
cooperate in fulfilling their collective responsibility to protect. “The protection of the
populations in the Syrian Arab Republic is the primary responsibility of the Syrian state.

However, in face of the State’s failure to do so, and with a situation of continued attacks
against civilians by all parties to the conflict, the international community - and in particular
the Security Council - has the responsibility to take timely and decisive action to protect
populations in Syria,” stated the Special Advisers and the Special Rapporteurs.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Sarah Jacquier Nobel
UN Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212-963-3574
Email: jacquier@un.org