UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
-MESSAGE TO THE MINISTERIAL ROUNDTABLE ON THE
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT”
New York, 30 September 2015
The plight of so many people facing or fleeing serious human rights violations,
including atrocity crimes, starkly illustrates the need to move the responsibility to protect
from principle to practice.

My latest report on the concept, issued earlier this year, outlines an achievable
agenda for the next decade. Much can be accomplished with renewed political
commitment, investment in prevention, timely responses, support for breaking cycles of
recurring violence, enhanced regional action, and expanded peer networks.

Improving the protection of vulnerable populations requires adapting existing
tools, undertaking institutional reform and redirecting resources.

I welcome the focus of this Ministerial roundtable on the links between atrocity
crime prevention and our wider work in conflict prevention, peacebuilding, the protection
of civilians, the empowerment of women and girls and international criminal justice.

Indeed, the identification and mitigation of atrocity crimes must be integrated into these
broader efforts, which are all aimed at fulfilling our obligations to promote, respect and
protect the human rights of all.

Member States bear the primary duty to prevent and protect. Implementing the
responsibility to protect demands political will and national commitment, backed when
needed by international assistance and sharing of experiences.

I encourage you to make the principle a guiding priority in your international
cooperation, regional engagement, foreign policy and national implementation. We need
your strong and public commitment to advance real change. Strong cooperation with
regional organizations and civil society actors is essential.

Member States of the Security Council carry a special responsibility when
national actors are unwilling or unable to act.

Internally, my Human Rights Up Front initiative seeks to achieve cultural and
operational change within the United Nations family to ensure that the prevention of
serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law is a system-wide
responsibility.

I am deeply committed to its implementation, and will also continue employing
my good offices to encourage proactive responses to situations of concern. I urge
Member States to support the Human Rights Up Front initiative.

Fulfilling the responsibility to protect is a collective endeavour. I welcome the
growing network of national focal points dedicated to the responsibility to protect, and
the positive momentum this represents.

Let us step up efforts to make our responsibility a reality in the lives of those in
need of protection.

UNITED NATIONS w yy NATIONS UNIES

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
REMARKS TO GENERAL ASSEMBLY INFORMAL INTERACTIVE
DIALOGUE ON “A VITAL AND ENDURING COMMITMENT:
IMPLEMENTING THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT”

New York, 8 September 2015

Your Excellency Mr. Einar Gunnarsson, Acting President of the General Assembly,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

Ten years ago, world leaders transformed expectations about the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity.

When Heads of State and Government unanimously endorsed the World Summit
Outcome, they expressed an unprecedented resolve to protect populations from the most
egregious international crimes and to assist one another in this effort.

The endorsement of the responsibility to protect was a milestone in transforming
international concern about people facing mortal danger into a meaningful response.

In the decade since, we forged growing consensus on how to carry out R2P.

Today, on its 10" anniversary, I urgently call on governments and UN entities —
especially the Security Council to move from understanding to action.

The Security Council is the only body empowered under international law to
authorize military action to save lives when all else fails. We must do all that we can to
act early, prevent atrocity crimes and support states in protecting their citizens.

The question that must guide the Council’s work is: have we truly done all that
we can?

Countries know that the responsibility to prevent and respond to atrocity crimes is
among their primary obligations -- both under international law and as a matter of
common humanity. Leaders can no longer claim that national sovereignty outweighs all
other concerns, or hide behind excuses about national circumstances or exceptional
security threats.

Awareness is important — but since R2P was adopted, the international
community has failed too many vulnerable populations. We face a daunting, damning list of crises marked by acts that may constitute
atrocity crimes. The concerns span many regions.

Syria is the world’s largest humanitarian crisis. The parties have shown wanton
disregard for human life. All parties are alleged to have committed grave violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law that may amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity. The Syrian Government in particular has not lived up to its
obligation under international law to protect civilians.

The conflict is a colossal tragedy for Syria and a shameful symbol of international
divisions. History’s judgement will be harsh.

I deplore the abject failure to end the suffering of the Syrian people. That failure
takes concrete expression in today’s refugee crisis in Europe.

We must do everything possible to find a political solution based on the Geneva
Communiqué. J appeal again for Security Council action.

In Yemen, civilians bear the brunt of a brutal conflict marked by reports of
increasingly blatant violations of international humanitarian law.

In the Central African Republic, Muslims and Christians were targeted because of
who they are or what they believe.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, armed groups continue to kill civilians.

I remain deeply concerned about the situation in South Sudan and Sudan,
particularly in Darfur and the Two Areas. The culture of impunity must end.

I am particularly alarmed at the unacceptable impact on children. Their suffering
due to violations of fundamental rights should prompt immediate action.

In the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, a wide array of crimes against
humanity have been documented.

These and other situations demand that we strengthen our work across all the
pillars of R2P.

Failure to rise to that moral obligation means greater human suffering that
reverberates across borders.

R2P requires prevention. People need early protection so they are not forced to
flee their homes. When we fail in that primary obligation, we face the subsidiary obligation to
address their plight. Throughout our search for a collective response to the root causes
and manifestations of atrocity crimes, we uphold and defend human rights.

Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

The atrocity crimes that stain humanity’s conscience make it imperative that
leaders transform R2P from a vital principle into visible practice.

That is why I am calling for three steps:

First: Genuine willingness anong Member States, especially Security Council
members, to create the necessary political space to prevent and respond to atrocity
crimes.

And third: Courage in publicly confronting and addressing signs of risk.

As a cross-cutting priority we must also invest financially in prevention.

The 2011 intervention in Libya offered important lessons. Military force may be
required as a last resort — but it must be grounded in a clear, common understanding of
the goals, overarching strategy, potential consequences and conditions on the ground.

Firm compliance with international human rights and humanitarian law is essential.

After the guns fall silent, we must ensure that atrocity crimes do not recur. We
can help societies to rebuild by encouraging reconciliation and holding perpetrators to
account.

This is a demanding agenda. Some may argue that the risks and costs of action are
too high. But the costs of inaction are far higher. Our failure to respond decisively to the
unfolding tragedy today returns as another tragedy tomorrow: namely desperate people
fleeing indiscriminate violence — and in too many cases losing their lives in their quest
for safety.

Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

The global security landscape is shifting in dangerous ways. New technology is
being used to incite violence. Cyberthreats are on the rise. Non-State actors are brazenly
committing atrocity crimes as a means of pursuing their political goals and spreading
violent extremism. In response, countries must continue building their capacity to counter terrorism
and prevent the spread of violent extremism in full accordance with human rights and the
tule of law.

The United Nations will continue working with Member States, regional
organizations and civil society to support these efforts to advance progress.

I call on all partners to institutionalize our commitment to R2P by showing
political will to address serious human rights violations. I recommend appointing focal
points and empowering officials with the resources and authority to act.

I have made the responsibility to protect a core priority. I have significantly
strengthened our Organization’s capacity in this area. I will continue to sound the alarm
about situations of concern. I will press for dialogue and diplomacy. I will push for more
rapid deployments of troops and police when necessary and authorized by the Security
Council. I will deepen cooperation with regional organizations. And I will fully carry out
our Human Rights Up Front Action Plan.

Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

For ten years, R2P has offered an alternative to indifference and fatalism.

The challenges of atrocity crimes are enormous — and the human cost is
staggering. That is not a reason to be overwhelmed — it is a cause for urgent action.

The collective weight of international action can make a difference.

I count on your leadership in making sure that R2P provides real protection for
people in dire need