-_-_
to
-

URUGUAY

Cendinete 16 Jan Unnted étions
Slory Council 2015-2017

 

URUGUAY

INTERVENTION OF THE

Ambassador Gonzalo Koncke
Permanent Representative of the Uruguay
to the United Nations

 

Interactive Diadlogo the General Assembly on
Responsibility to Protect

NEW YORK, 8 SEPTEMBER
2015
(Check against delivery)

 

The Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
UN Plaza Suite 866 * 322 * New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 752 8240 * Fax: (212) 593 0935 * Uruguay @ un.int

1 Mr. President,

First, let me congratulate and thank the President of the Assembly
General for convening this important didlogo on a subject to which my country
assigns a high priority.

I also wish to welcome the latest report of the Secretary-General
entitled "A vital and enduring commitment: to establish the liability of
protect ", in which a stock of progress made is made and
implementacién efforts on the three pillars, as well as addressed the
challenges and threats today to the responsibility to protect.

Mr. President,

This is not a year but since a decade is met from the aprobaci6n of the
Final Document of the 2005 Summit, the text of the concept was introduced
the responsibility to protect by paragraphs 138 and 139.

From that date until today progress has been registered, including 30
Resolutions of the Security Council and 13 resolutions of the Council
Human rights, including the responsibility to protect.

But this year no Selo marks 10 years of the responsibility to protect it
also the 70th anniversary of the United Nations so we understand
adequate time for the General Assembly to take a Resolucién in
matter to translate the consensus that the day of the date register and
also to include the item on its formal agenda.

Mr. President,

Uruguay as a member of the ACT Group supports its proposal Cédigo of
Conduct with the aim that the permanent members of the Council
Security refrain from using the veto in the case of those resolutions
They are related to mass atrocities, as well as adhering to the
French initiative voluntary abstencién of the Permanent Members of the
Security Council in the case of genocide, war crimes, cleaning
ethnic and crimes against humanity.

Uruguay, a country that unfortunately I experienced the horrors of a dictatorship
military between 1973 and 1984 cometié crimes against humanity, assigned to the
rendicién account of fundamental importance in the case of crimes
atrocious and in that sense we emphasize the importance of the International Criminal Court
in the fight against impunity for genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

Mr President, we are aware that despite progress, the responsibility to protect
remains a concept discussed politically, particularly the link
which almost automatically becomes the "Pillar 3" and within this the
possibility of employing the use of force.

However, we recognize that the pillars 1 and 2 are the most widely
accepted and have to do with the prevention of mass atrocities, are
the most effective in addressing the issue of the responsibility to protect.

Through the designation of focal points at the time amounted to 49
are strengthening preventive national and regional capacities and the
same time are also taken steps towards confidence-building
among States.

I especially want to emphasize the role of international organizations in the
prevencién agenda, while noting that Operations
Peacekeeping is a tool increasingly prevencién
relevant in the context of intra-state conflicts as they can help
prevent the resumption of conflict, avoiding or minimizing abuses of the State
receptor and / Rebel groups register developments and improvements in the area of ​​the
protection of civilians and may be an early warning tool.

In 10 of the 16 operations Peacekeeping found
currently deployed there Protection of Civilian mandates that
developed within the framework of the International Humanitarian Law, Rights
Human and Refugees, and bearing in mind that the obligacién
Primary protect civilians rests with the State Headquarters.

My country has confirmed actions over the years his vocation and will
to protect civilians through its ongoing and active participaci6n in
venues in which these issues are discussed as well as does the
field through its concrete contribution contingent that desempefian daily
Noble committed to that task.

Mr. President,

Uruguay is a candidate for a non-permanent seat on the Council
Security in the 2016-17 biennium and be elected will continue working from that place
and others with a view to the rights of all, especially of the most
vulnerable, they are respected