BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
Permanent Mission to the United Nations

Intervencién of Ambassador Rafael Ramirez,
Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the Nations
together

Informal Interactive Dialogue "Responsibility to Protect"

United Nations General Assembly

Please compare the words of the speaker

September 8, 2015 70d BSCE ST0C da 20/007 wd President,

one.

We thank the President of the General Assembly for the organization of this
Informal interactive dialogue and the Secretary General for his presentaci6n.

Venezuela is committed to the need to prevent crimes
against humanity, war, genocide and ethnic cleansing, wherever they occur and
the comet who commits.

That does not mean that we agree that the responsibility to protect
It is e] means more suitable to meet this need.

The promoters of the responsibility to protect and officials of Nations
United have tended to focus, for tactical reasons, in areas of consensus
as the prevention, but the main international controversy revolves around wing
intervencién and use military force to protect.

The responsibility to protect seeks to divide states into two categories:
responsible (good) and irresponsible (bad). The clasificacién the
holding a group of countries they are considered morally superior to
others. All those who fall into the field of irresponsible can
be subject to military intervenci6n.

However, a glance at the look RAPID record of the promoters more
Burning of the responsibility to protect reveals a picture very consistent
morally.

During the 90 years, Iraq was the subject of the most extensive regime of sanctions
the history of the United Nations. Iraq depended on exports
petréleo for income and sanctions blocked all exports.

Iraq depended on the importation to cover virtually all other
needs of society, and sanctions also blocked almost all
imports. The sanctions contained, however, a clause according to
which Iraq could import food to avoid what had been called a
"Humanitarian situation". But differences over what constituted "situation

Pag. 2de5 humanitarian "reveal the true intentions of their promoters. For
Cuba and Yemen, permanent non-elected members of the Security Council,
a "humanitarian situacién" existiria as soon as signals were complied with
malnutrition in Iraqi poblacién. Delegates from the United States and the United
Britain, on the other hand, argued that Selo could speak of a "situation
humanitarian "if widespread famine was produced of the Iraqi population.

Estimates of the human cost of sanctions imposed on Iraq between
1991 and 1998 are between 500,000 and 2 million people.

After defeating Saddam Hussein in 2003, the US Army desmantels
iraqi more than 400 thousand troops, despidié to more than thirty-five thousand
civil service employees, including university professors, teachers
schools and media officials, and I impidié the creacién of an interim government.

Abdicé period followed its responsibilities as an Occupying Power under the
Geneva Convention and I left the country before an empty cash to.

government buildings, universities, libraries, hospitals, and museums
They were looted. Insufficient troops to safeguard million
You tons of ammunition abandoned by the Iraqi army and to safeguard
borders with Syria, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Iran, significé that provinces
Iraq entire stay at the mercy of armed bands and insurgencies.

10.The conservative estimates of US invasién in 2003 put the

eleven.

death toll among people mill6n. The seed for the emergence
ISIS and strengthening A the Qaeda and other terrorist groups in the region
He had been planted and paid.

On 17 March 2011, the Security Council would adopt the resoluci6n 1973,
the responsibility to protect, authorizing a coalicién of countries
take all necessary measures to protect the Libyan poblacién. The
coalici6n would go far beyond massively arming and assisting forces
tebeldes, changing the regime, killing all infrastructure la_
institutional development of the State, and laying the groundwork for a power vacuum that even
lurks to the Libyan people. Weapons of the conflict soon lIlegarian to Regien of the

Pag. 3 de5 Sahel, exponentially enhanced military power Boko Haram, To the Qaeda and
At the Shabaab.

12.The sanctions and military interventions promoted by the porta
standards of international morality are responsible for the death of
million people and the rise and terrorist forces consolidacién
most atrocious and powerful ever seen. gCuantos have been held accountable for the
deaths of millions of civilians? How many people have been brought to the
international justice for crimes committed? ~ Cudntos have assumed
responsibility for the conflicts in the Middle East and North
Africa today? Hugo Chavez President Cemo said at the 2005 Summit,
éQuién will protect us from these so called protectors?

Mr. President,

13. 4Cémo arrived at the conclusién that war is an appropriate mechanism
to prevent war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing?
Some countries with large military-industrial appliances tend to see the war
and coercién as a natural opcién, even as a necessity. Venezuela
has never been involved in a war since I been rising at its
independence in 1821. Therefore, for us, that in nocién
coercién this war and the solution does not handle. In Latin America and the
Caribbean have created a regional and subregional effective architecture
tesolver our disputes. Latin America and the Caribbean is a "Zone
Peace ", a" Nuclear Weapons Free Zone "and one of the most peaceful regions
of World.

Mr. President,

14.La way the concept of the responsibility to protect has been
development has lacked self-criticism, transparency and openness.

15.La responsibility to protect has been abrogated virtually all
tools of the United Nations Charter: the measures outlined in

Pag. 4de5 Chapters VI and VII, maintenance of peace,
consolidacién peace, preventive diplomacy, but has not developed
criteria, steps, de_ reference terms, thresholds, responsibilities,
rendicién account mechanisms that allow us to understand Cemo and
When these tools are applied within the framework of the call
tesponsabilidad to protect.

16.This exchange of four minutes per State is not a process

intergovernmental. In fact, conversacién among Member States
comenz6 and ceased in 2005. As in previous ajfios, Venezuela calls
to engage in intergovernmental negotiations regarding propésitos, the
scope, terms of reference, rendicién mechanisms of accounts,
Tesponsabilidades, and the actions we can engage to prevent
crimes against humanity, war, genocide and ethnic cleansing. The future of
civilian populations can not depend on a nebulous concept,
manipulable and selective hope the world much more of us