Albania aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union (see A/73/PV.93). I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacityAlbania congratulates the General Assembly
on its widespread support for the principle of the
responsibility to protect (R2P) and on having a formal
plenary meeting on the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, reaffirming that there
is a great need to address the increasing number of
contemporary atrocity situations around the worldI would also like to reiterate what I said on behalf of
my delegation at last year’s meeting (see A/72/PV.105),
namely, that R2P should be a standing item on the
General Assembly agenda.

Albania also recognizes the added value of women
in conflict prevention. In September 2018, the Albanian
Government therefore adopted its first national action
plan for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The action plan aims to integrate
the gender perspective into our national, foreign
and security policies, providing a comprehensive
legal framework to promote and increase women’s
participation in political and public life, as well as in
the security sectorAlbania would also like to encourage the members
of the Security Council to have an open debate on
the responsibility to protect, as well as to include the
issue in the briefings of the Special Advisers to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect with regard to early
warning of situations where populations are at risk
of war crimes, genocide, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity. Albania also call for the appropriate
use of diplomatic and other means to implement R2P
and early prevention.

Attention has been paid to mainstreaming a gendersensitive approach in the training of civil, police and
military personnel, with a special focus on preventionIn that regard, I would also like to praise the spirit of
the first two Albanian female peacekeepers in South
Sudan, Viola Hoxha and Valentina Korbi, who believe
that their mission is to help others in facilitating
the establishment of contacts with the local female
population, developing their capacities and making
them relevant to societyFurthermore, my country welcomes the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General on R2P (A/73/898)
and its focus on prevention. We consider it a call to the
international community to do more to help States as
they address weaknesses in their capacity to prevent
atrocities, including through assistance for more
effective holistic prevention policies.

Albania is a supporter of R2P and the implementation
of its three pillars and its operationalization. We
appointed a focal point for R2P within the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Albania. The role provides for
the promotion of R2P at the national level and support
for international cooperation through participation in
the Global Network of R2P Focal Points. The focal
point also shares information and coordinates the
institutions on conceptual issues of the three pillars
of the responsibility to protect and its challenges,
such as State responsibility and prevention, within the
national context. Furthermore, the focal point assesses
the requirement for the development of a national plan
of action on R2P, including with regard to awareness,
risk assessment, capacity-building, early warning,
monitoring and the identification of institutional
structures to implement R2P in practice and ensure
early prevention and of the capacities needed at a
central level to prevent mass atrocities and their role in
early prevention.

Human Rights Council resolution A/HRC/38/18
recognizes the contribution that the Human Rights
Council makes to the prevention of human rights
violations, including through dialogue and cooperation
and by responding promptly to human rights
emergencies. Furthermore, the resolution emphasizes
that development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. In other words,
it emphasizes that long-term peace and sustainable
development are not possible where human rights are
violated, particularly without the implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 16. In that regard, the
further strengthening of links between the Human
Rights Council and the Security Council regarding
early warning and early action are very necessaryTo that end, I would like to emphasize the conclusion
of the Secretary-General’s report with regard to the
fact that, in upholding their primary responsibility to
protect, States can implement measures to strengthen
their national resilience to atrocities. We can assist each
other in implementing initiatives aimed at reducing
atrocity risks and we all can do more to consistently
translate early warning into early preventive action..

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the chairs of fact-finding missions and
commissions of inquiry should participate in Security
Council briefings, as required