(spoke in Spanish):
I thank the President for convening these meetings
on the responsibility to protect. I also welcome the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons learned
for prevention” (A/73/898), as well as its analysis,
conclusions and recommendations aimed at influencing
the implementation of the outcome of the 2005 World
Summit based on experience acquired since thenIn the face of crimes of atrocity, the range of
issues to be considered is broad. The responsibility
to protect against the most serious crimes means that
accountability and the exercise of justice as reparation
are unavoidable keys to responding to the victims
of these crimes. Accordingly, at the international
community level, the role played by the International
Criminal Court is of indispensable value.

As in so many other aspects, there are opposing
forces in this area. On the one hand, as the report
reminds us, important institutional and strategic
advances are being made by States, at the regional
level and in civil society. On the other hand, despite the
need for the international community to be prepared
to respond to such challenges, multilateralism can be
weakened by a lack of commitment. Undoubtedly, the
international community must be strengthened so as
to prevent atrocious crimes. At the United Nations,
Andorra has supported and continues to support the
French-Mexican initiative to refrain from using the
veto in the Security Council in such cases, as well as
the code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherency
and Transparency group.

In this regard, we would like concretely to emphasize
the value of education in prevention. In order to achieve
societies capable of creating and managing imaginations
and relationships, of developing themselves with
respect to and in recognition of the potential of each
individual and in training them for world citizenship, it
is necessary to have focus on the educational dimension,
so that it is appropriate and adapted to circumstances
and that it has an impact on values. Education is one
of the earliest forms of prevention as it can guarantee
values-based attitudes and behaviours as well as a
critical sense in conflict situations. Through UNESCO,
the United Nations agency for education and culture,
working with all Member States, the Organization has
a wide range of resources that can be applied not only
for students in the school setting but throughout life. As
for my country, Andorra, we give, as part of our policy
of international cooperation, our financial support to
actions that promote and develop education.

The report of the Secretary-General also highlights
how regional organizations play a role in spreading
political ideas that lead to good practices. One example
is the programme being developed by the Council of
Europe, “Education for democratic citizenship”, which
is an initiative sponsored by Andorra and falls within
the framework of Sustainable Development Goal 4.7,
which focuses on education for global citizenship. This
programme considers values, attitudes, skills and critical
understanding, while teaching conflict resolution and
the art of mediation starting from childhood. Through
inclusive education, the necessary skills for the
appreciation of the richness of diversity are taught so
that hate speech is seen as totally unacceptableStates, and indeed the whole world, count on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals as a practical guide
to shaping their policies. Although innovation is often
more easily associated with science- and technologyrelated objectives, innovative social initiatives are
necessary for developing mechanisms and attitudes that
foster such values as solidarity and cooperation, for
incorporating constructive relationships and facilitating
reconciliation. These approaches will be solid if they
are based on well-tested foundation of human rights,
which is a pillar of the United Nations. It is up to none
other than us..

If cultural heritages are respected and valued, no
one can claim superiority over others. In this regard,
the Secretary-General’s Strategy and Plan of Action on
Hate Speech is very timely and necessary. To achieve
these objectives, the root causes of such atrocities as
discrimination and inequality must be identifiedKnowing how they occur and, no less important, how
they are perceived, provide the guidelines for creating
specific programmes and call for the active participation
of communities, so that none is left out