(spoke in Spanish): We
believe that resolution 73/304, which the Republic
of Argentina co-sponsored, was not intended to urge
States to adjust or modify their domestic legislation,
in particular their criminal justice systems. On
the contrary, the resolution invites States to share
their points of view and contributions in order to
establish common standards on the trade in items
used for the death penalty through a transparent and
inclusive process.

Moreover, in addition to what is indicated in the
text, we are in no way pre-empting the results that
might emerge from the report of the Secretary-General
or the analysis of the group of experts in terms of the
trade in goods used for the death penalty.

We underscore the fact that the text also makes
a distinction by referring to goods used for the death
penalty, on the one hand, and goods used for torture
or other cruel or inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, on the other, bearing in mind the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations that
apply in this context and international human rights law.

For Argentina, the adoption of the resolution is a
crucial step forward in the international community’s
efforts to move forward in developing standards that
will better protect human rights.

(spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to express my gratitude for the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General (A/73/898), which
details the lessons learnt with respect to a key aspect of
the responsibility to protect: prevention.

As stated in the report, States must facilitate
the prevention of atrocity crimes by focusing on the
following crucial areas: the importance of accountability
and the rule of law, the central role of civil society in
representing a multitude of diverse perspectives, and the
existence of guarantees of non-recurrence, inter alia.

Argentina deems useful the analysis conducted
by the Secretary-General and believes that all States,
as equal and sovereign States, have reciprocal rights
and responsibilities and that all should be equally
committed to the protection of their peoples against
atrocity crimes, through respect for international law,
in particular respect for humanitarian law, human
rights norms and refugee rights law, as well as the fight
against impunity.

We therefore believe that prevention is the most
important dimension in protecting peoples from

atrocity crimes. We share the importance that the
Secretary-General attaches to this dimension of the
responsibility to protect by encouraging States to
conduct national risk and resilience assessments with a
gender perspective, as part of other existing processes,
such as the Universal Periodic Review.

We also value the lessons learned that were
indicated in the report, which underscores the need
for concerted action by States at the national level to
prevent of atrocity crimes, as well as the need for the
international community to remain united as we aim to
prioritize prevention as an essential focal point.

Moreover, it is vital that we value the participation
of other stakeholders, such as civil society and regional
and subregional organizations, in conflict prevention
and resolution efforts. We also deem it necessary to
step up our efforts to empower women as agents in the
prevention of atrocity crimes.

It is imperative to bolster accountability when it
comes to those responsible for atrocity crimes. The
ratification of the Rome Statute and its amendments
is vital in order to protect populations, given it
contribution to the fight against impunity and its role
as a deterrent mechanism. We also invite all Member
States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration, which
has already been signed by 91 States.

Argentina supports the initiatives of the United
Nations system, such as the responsibility to protect,
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding efforts, the
promotion of the rule of law and the Human Rights
Up Front initiative, among others. We would also like
to highlight the contribution of the Global Network of
Responsibility to Protect Focal Points as an essential
tool to build individual and collective capacities to
prevent mass atrocities.

I would like to express our support for the work of the
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility
to Protect. We also welcome the new Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect, Ms. Karen Smith,
and reiterate the willingness of Argentina to work
constructively with her Office.