Australia is a member
of the cross-regional Global Alliance for Torture-free
Trade and strongly supported resolution 73/304Trade in goods that can be used only for torture
and other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or
punishment has been a long-standing concern at the
United Nations. Over 30 years ago, the first Special
Rapporteur on torture, appointed by the Commission on
Human Rights, addressed the issue in an early reportSeveral resolutions have called for action in this field,
most recently resolution 72/163, on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
which was adopted without a voteRegional organizations, such as the African
Union Commission and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, have recognized the
seriousness of the torture trade and recommended
action. One hundred and sixty-six States have ratified
the Convention against Torture, and have thereby
pledged to take effective legislative, administrative,
judicial or other measures to prevent acts of torture in
any territory under their jurisdiction. Taking steps to
address the trade in torture goods is a critical way by
which such prevention can be assured.

The approach proposed in resolution 73/304 is
intended first and foremost to solicit the views of
all Member States as to how common international
standards might be formulated in future. The views of
all Member States will form the basis for the report of
the Secretary-General, which will then be considered
by a group of governmental experts chosen on the basis
of equitable geographical distribution. We do not assert,
and neither does the resolution, that the imposition of
the death penalty per se amounts to torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Neither
do we assert, and nor does the resolution, that the death
penalty is prohibited per se under international lawThe resolution requests that the group of
governmental experts consider, among other things,
the scope of goods to be covered by any common
international standards. That is because certain goods
that are traded, including portable gas chambers, can
be used in ways that inflict undue suffering..

Australia was proud to partner
with Ghana to propose last year’s important debate
on the responsibility to protect (R2P), the first in the
General Assembly for a decade. More than 100 States
from every region participated. Support for the R2P
principle and its implementation was overwhelming, as
was the desire for ongoing dialogue in the Assembly
on how we can better protect populations from mass
atrocities. Such a response was fitting. After all, when
our leaders agreed the R2P principle, in 2005, they
envisaged a leading role for the Assembly. We also
appreciated the opportunity to hear those who have
questions or harbour misgivings. Let me reaffirm
that the R2P principle is not a stalking horse for other
agendas or an attempt to reinterpret the Charter of
the United Nations. It is about reinforcing the need to
work collectively in line with the Charter to protect
populations from mass atrocities.

Australia agrees with the Secretary-General that
regional organizations are essential to operationalizing
R2P. Pacific Islands Forum leaders — via the declarations
made in Biketawa in 2000 and Boe in 2018 — have long
recognized our collective vulnerability and the need to
address such challenges at the regional level, as the
Permanent Representative of the Marshall Islands just
reminded usThe Biketawa Declaration served as the foundation
for regional assistance efforts, including a successful
mission to Solomon Islands — the Regional Assistance
Mission to the Solomon Islands — which ended in 2017,
a meaningful example of pillar 2 in action. The 2018
Boe Declaration reaffirms the critical importance of
a rules-based international order, with the Charter at
its heart. It commits to strengthening regional security
and stability, including by identifying and addressing
emerging security challenges and improving earlywarning mechanisms.

Regional organizations can learn much from each
other in their respective atrocity prevention effortsThat is why Australia supports innovative regional
initiatives such as the Asia Pacific Partnership for
Atrocity Prevention. Australia will host the first
regional meeting of Asia-Pacific R2P focal points later
this year. Such collaboration is bolstered by global
forums such the Global Network of R2P Focal Points,
in which Australia is active. With 61 focal points, the
Network shares ideas and policies and builds capacity
for implementing R2PAustralia thanks the Secretary-General’s Chef
de Cabinet for the insightful remarks today and for
this year’s report of the Secretary-General on R2P
(A/73/898). We pay tribute to the efforts of the Special
Advisers for the Prevention of Genocide and R2P,
Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Karen Smith. We agree that
the United Nations principal organs and its Member
States have a critical role in implementing R2P. But it
is important also to evaluate the role of the Secretariat.

Recent independent reviews have highlighted the
critical importance of United Nations officials speaking
for the Organization as a whole in situations of mass
atrocities. It is also essential that the Secretariat ensure
that reporting from the field provides an accurate and
complete picture of developments on the ground. In
that regard, we wholeheartedly support the SecretaryGeneral’s ongoing reform agendaThe Charter endows the Security Council with
unique powers. With such powers comes special
responsibilities. That is why we joined 118 others
to support the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group’s code of conduct, which is a
commitment to refrain from vetoing Security Council
action in cases of mass atrocities. We also encourage all
States, but especially current and prospective Security
Council members, to join Australia and 100 other
States in supporting the France-Mexico initiative on
veto restraint. In instances where a permanent member
blocks Council action in cases of mass atrocities or
atrocity risk, we believe that we should explore possible
ways to use the Assembly for further dialogue.