At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Karen Smith on her appointment
as the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
as well as to voice my appreciation for the work done
by her predecessors. I also take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his third report on the
responsibility to protect (A/73/898), which adequately
focuses on lessons learned and prevention. Those two
interrelated elements are instrumental for the future
implementation of the responsibility to protect (R2P)The lessons learned from past experiences confirm
that prevention should always be our primary focus in
protecting populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing.

In the 2005 World Summit Outcome document,
Member States stressed the need for the General
Assembly to continue its consideration of the
responsibility to protect. Yet, in the almost 15 years
since then, this is only the third formal debate held
by the Assembly on the matter. Brazil welcomes the
inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda and expresses
its support for the formal discussion of this topic
in future General Assembly sessions. As the most
democratic organ of the United Nations, the Assembly
should assert ownership and shape the debate on the
protection of the world’s populations from the most
serious crimes of international concern. The emphasis
on prevention reinforces the key role that the General
Assembly plays in R2P debates, given that many United
Nations initiatives with preventive effects take place in
this forum.

Besides looking at the past, the most recent report
of the Secretary-General also invites Member States to
look inward. That is wise and often forgotten advice,
grounded in the origins of R2P, the essence of which is
precisely each State’s responsibility to protect its own
population. As the report accurately points out, viewing
R2P as an exclusively international issue reinforces the
erroneous notion that it is primarily about international
responses to domestic crises. On the contrary, for
R2P to overcome criticism, its implementation should
not focus on the exceptional and sporadic imposition
of coercive measures, but rather on the ongoing
development of structural policies that contribute to
more peaceful, inclusive and tolerant societies. Such
policies include actions on human rights education,
the promotion of a culture of peace and tolerance,
measures against xenophobia and racial discrimination,
reparation programmes for victims of serious human
rights violations and the promotion and protection of
the human rights of the most vulnerable segments of
the population.

The second part of the report addresses the role
of the international community. Brazil welcomes
the initial emphasis on long-term and structural
prevention, in line with an approach that tackles the
root causes of R2P crimes. Nevertheless, we would
have preferred it if the report had drawn a clear
dividing line between prevention and response, so as
to avoid conflating pillar II, related to prevention, with
pillar III, related to response. While the former refers
to international cooperation to build the capacity of
States to protect their populations from R2P crimes, the
latter encompasses potential responses to the manifest
failures of national authorities to attain that objective.

It is only when preventive measures fall short that
response action comes into playWhen response action is deemed necessary, there is
a range of non-coercive measures that can help prevent
R2P crimes, including mediation, negotiation, counternarratives to incitement to violence and actions to reduce
the vulnerability of civilian populations. In the worst
case scenario, if coercive measures are considered and
duly authorized in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, their implementation must be judicious,
proportionate and strictly limited to the objectives of
the mandate. Moreover, Security Council resolutions
that authorize military action should include sunset
clauses, demand adequate reporting and provide for the
monitoring of its implementation.

Brazil considers that R2P is, first and foremost,
about implementing existing provisions of international
law. In that regard, as we have flagged in previous
speeches, it is important to avoid the temptation of
proliferating imprecise concepts. The oft-used term
“atrocity crimes” is not defined in international law
or in multilateral resolutions or decisions. The four
crimes mentioned in the 2005 Outcome document are
undoubtedly atrocity crimes but so are others that are
not included under R2P, such as aggression. Moreover,
despite generally being dealt with as a homogenous
group, each kind of crime may derive from different
factors and therefore require distinctive strategies for
prevention. However, one common trait is the frequent
correlation between R2P crimes and armed conflicts,
which reinforces the argument with regard to the
atrocious nature of the crime of aggression and recalls
the importance of conflict preventionThe fact that they still occur and cause so many
victims shows that we need to do more to protect our
populations with long-term preventive measures and
structural policies that promote more inclusive, diverse
and tolerant societies..

In conclusion, as the Secretary-General correctly
highlights in his report, R2P crimes are preventable