Cabo Verde welcomes
the adoption of resolution 73/304. The resolution is an

example of the best the United Nations can do to better
promote and protect human rights for all.

Torture is universally recognized as a serious
crime, and is therefore prohibited under international
law. As a State party to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and its Second Optional
Protocol and the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
and its Optional Protocol, Cabo Verde seizes this
opportunity to once again confidently reaffirm that no
one shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment.

The provisions set forth in this resolution are ways
to conduct a fair analysis on feasibility and allow for an
accurate reflection of the scope of the range of options
for establishing common international standards
for the import, export and transfer of goods used for
capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment. By doing so,
we will be able to set the parameters for achieving
torture-free trade.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 74.

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I should like to draw the
attention of the General Assembly to draft resolution
A/73/L.88, which has been distributed in connection
with sub-item (b) of agenda item 74, entitled “Human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms”.

Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 74 at its 61st plenary meeting, on 19 December
2018. In order for the Assembly to take action on the
draft resolution before it, it will be necessary to re-open
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 74.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to re-open its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 74?

It was so decided (decision 73/504 B).

Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
(b) Human rights questions, including alternative
approaches for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms
Draft resolution (A/73/L.88)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Afghanistan to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.88.