(spoke in Chinese):
China has concerns about draft resolution A/73/L.94,
entitled “Towards torture-free trade”, which was
submitted by the European UnionFirst of all, it is important to emphasize that
China is a party to the Convention against TortureWe have always firmly opposed torture, unremittingly
promoting the rule of law, human rights protection
and the prohibition of torture in legislation, law
enforcement, justice and monitoring. China’s position
on the draft resolution has nothing to do with the issue of
torture and does not affect or change China’s principled
position of firmly opposing and prohibiting torture.

China is seriously concerned that the main sponsors
of the draft resolution are linking trade with human
rights issues. That could be used in future for political
purposes to artificially create barriers to international
trade on account of human rights, thereby having a
negative impact of the free flow of international tradeThe draft resolution also includes capital punishment
in its scope, which has no basis in international lawAs is known, all countries have serious differences on
the issue of the death penalty. Countries should decide
whether to apply the death penalty in line with their
national circumstances and cultural traditions. The
draft resolution disregards the diversity of cultures,
traditions and judicial systems among different
countries in the world by imposing the suspension or
abolition of the death penalty on other countries.

The draft resolution deals with torture, capital
punishment, trade and human rights and their
interrelationships, aiming to establish common
international standards and turn them into international
law. It covers a wide scope with a far-reaching impactMember States must be able to study it carefully and
in-depth and build consensus through full consultationOn the contrary, there have been only three informal
consultations on the draft resolution. While many
countries still have fundamental difficulties with the
draft, the main sponsors are insisting on submitting it to
the General Assembly for consideration. This practice
of imposing their will on others is not constructiveFor those reasons, China will vote against the draft
resolution and hopes that other countries will take the
same position..

(spoke in Chinese):
China listened carefully to Ms. Viotti’s statement
(see A/73/PV.93) and took note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the issue of the responsibility
to protect (A/73/898). We would like to make the
following observationsPursuant to international law, Governments have
the primary responsibility to protect their citizens,
which is a role that is irreplaceable. The international
community should abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, fully respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned and uphold the fundamental principles that
govern international relations, such as non-interference
in internal affairs, non-aggression and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The will and leadership of the
countries concerned should be fully respected and
constructive assistance should be provided to them. All
parties should strive to resolve their differences through
dialogue, consultation and political negotiation and
should prevent conflicts, resolve disputes peacefully,
reduce armed conflicts, foster the concept of a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security and build a community for the shared future
of humankind.

Prevention is the key to implementing the
responsibility to protect (R2P). We should step up our
efforts to focus more on prevention and vigorously
address both the symptoms and the root causes of
conflict. As stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, we should take preventive measures in various
fields, including the eradication of extreme poverty
and uneven development. We should build inclusive
societies, strengthen national capacity-building,
resolve problems by political means and fully leverage
the role of United Nations agencies and regional and
subregional organizationsDevelopment is a fundamental priority. All countries
should prioritize development and work together to
promote the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, enhance the capacity of
developing countries to achieve their own development
and reduce and eradicate poverty at a global level so
as to build a foundation for conflict prevention. At the
same time, the international community should strive
to build a vision of civilization that promotes mutual
respect and equality. We should support equality and
respect, abandon arrogance and prejudice and promote
openness, tolerance and mutual learning in building an
inclusive social culture.

According to the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document, the responsibility to protect is strictly
limited to four kinds of crimes: genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. That
formulation is a balanced compromise negotiated
by all countries and a hard-won consensus, which
should not be subject to wilful expansion, much less
misinterpretation or abuse. Member States have not
yet agreed on the definition of and criteria for R2PInformal discussions, led by Member States, should
therefore continue. Consensus should be gradually
forged in order to avoid forcing issues onto the agenda
of the General Assembly. The persistent promotion and
imposition of controversial issues will only harm the
common interest of Member StatesChina would like to underline once again that the use
of force in enforcement measures and the authorization
to use force should be considered only when all peaceful
measures have been exhausted. It should also be in
line with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. Military action taken by the international
community to protect civilians must be authorized by
the Security Council with strict conditions attached and
explicit methods of implementation, which should be
considered on a case-by-case basis.