(spoke in Spanish):
The Republic of Colombia thanks the SecretaryGeneral for his report entitled “Responsibility to
protect: lessons learned for prevention” (A/73/898). The
report makes an appropriate assessment of the measures
that each State and the international community can
take to comply with their preventive responsibilities,
based on best practices since the adoption of the 2005
United Nations World Summit Outcome document on
the responsibility to protect. The series of practical
suggestions based on the experiences over the past
decade serve as a call to action to prevent atrocity
crimes and other very serious phenomena that activate
the concept of the responsibility to protect.

Colombia is not oblivious to the consequences of
violence. We therefore recognize the importance of
taking all the necessary measures to avoid and prevent
the commission of the most serious crimes for the
international community as a whole. The world is aware
of the efforts that we have made — and will continue
to make — to promote peace not just in Colombia but
throughout the worldThe need to strengthen the rule of law and ensure
accountability for atrocity crimes committed in the past
is a fundamental guarantee to prevent the repetition of
such crimes. Colombia is aware of that, and through
the implementation of the General Agreement for
the Termination of the Conflict and the Construction
of a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in 2016, as a
component of the objectives enshrined in our peace law
policy, we have implemented a series of mechanisms of
the comprehensive system of truth, justice, reparation
and non-repetition, with a view to guaranteeing victims
their rights and the fulfilment of the commitments
made under international law, including sanctions
proportional to the gravity of the crimes committed.

In 2011, as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, Colombia took a favourable stance
on measures that seek to protect the civilian population
from imminent attacks from a Government that,
through its actions and statements, has shown that it
is not up to the task of the international responsibility
it has to protect its people. As a result, we believe
that it is necessary for all Member States to comply
with our duties under international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law, while
keeping the doors open for those who are fleeing a lack
of protection and seeking to meet their most basic needs.

In that regard, I highlight Colombia’s support for
Switzerland’s proposal to reform the Rome Statute in
order to add the starvation of a population as a war
crime in non-international armed conflicts. That illegal,
immoral and criminal practice, which, unfortunately, is
still being used in different regions of the world, must
be eradicated and prosecuted wherever it is committedTo conclude, I would like to underpin two points
that my country believes are equally important for the
prevention of atrocitiesOn the one hand, we emphasize that the Sustainable
Development Goals are an opportunity to create a more
sustainable and peaceful future. In that context, we view
the role of Sustainable Development Goal 16, on peace,
justice and strong institutions, as especially relevant.

President Duque Márquez is committed to providing
all Colombians a secure and legitimate peace. That
means guaranteeing legality by strengthening the rule
of law and physical and legal safeties and securities,
stimulating entrepreneurship and the generation of new
wealth and broadening Colombians’ access to equitable
social welfare. That is our best weapon to prevent
atrocity crimes, to which we have been no strangerOn the other hand, Colombia insists on the leading
role that women have in the prevention of atrocity
crimes as a key element for early warning, the promotion
of cooperation and building capacities and support
networks at the local, regional and international levelsWe cannot change the events of the past, but we can
do everything within our grasp to prevent more serious
crimes from being committed in our world.