(spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank the President for her wise
stewardship in convening this meeting. My delegation
takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/898) entitled “The responsibility to protect:
lessons learned for prevention”.

Contemporary history has taught us harsh lessons
about the humanitarian tragedies that might have been
the result of hate messaging, racism and fascism leading
to dehumanizing the other, discrimination against the
other, violations of the rights of the other and even
attacks on the right to life. Historically, such practices
have always led to events of genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and massacres of all forms in
all kinds of contexts — religious, ethnic or racial.

In that regard, Egypt renews its support for the
content of the outcome document of the 2005 World
Summit whereby every State commits to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. We believe that this

is appropriate in order to address grave international
atrocities that originate from hatred within States and
then worsen and evolve to turn into real crimes at a
time when the international community and the United
Nations have not truly taken up their responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations.

My delegation believes that the ideal way to deal
with this thorny issue is to focus efforts on closing
the real gaps that have been revealed by historical
tragedies. At the same time, we must not waste efforts
by trying to develop the concept of the responsibility to
protect (R2P) in a way that runs counter to the current
international consensus. Doing so could threaten the
sovereignty of States and the principles of international
law, in particular the sovereign equality of States and
the prohibition of interference in internal affairs. We
believe that such an expansionist approach is a source
of concern. It undermines international consensus on
the very basis of the concept. It also leads to unfocused
efforts and to politicizing the issue while slowing down
United Nations involvement in dealing with these
atrocities. That in turn can only lead to more thousands
of victims, as history has well taught us.

In that regard, we once again stress the fact that the
R2P concept is quite clear in the Charter of the United
Nations and the mechanisms of this international
organization. There is therefore no need to reinvent the
wheel, so to speak, or to expand the interpretation of
the concept. All we need is national political will on
the part of States and the collective will of the entire
international community and the United Nations, as
set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.

They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

The fundamental responsibility to protect populations
against atrocities falls on Member States. National and
international efforts to prevent atrocities must focus
on strengthening national capabilities to prevent such
crimes, including by supporting national jurisdictions
in cases of conflict and in post-conflict situations. We
must respect the hierarchy of implementing the three
main pillars pertaining to R2P, where collective work is
the last resort, in line with the United Nations Charter.

We would like to question those States that included
this item on the agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session about its continued inclusion
on the agenda of the current session despite the
understanding at the time that the item would not be
inscribed on the agendas of future sessions. At the
previous session, my delegation, supported by many
others, stressed the need for the item not to be included
on the agenda of the current session until agreement
was reached on a clear and agreed understanding of the
R2P concept.

While we welcome the continuation of informal
consultations in that regard, we believe that the
continued inclusion of this item on the agenda, against
the prevailing understanding and in the absence of other
developments, would only weaken the international
consensus. Furthermore, it would lead to a lack of
focus on the real obstacles in dealing with those
atrocities and their causes, whether at the national or
international level.

I would like to mention the escalating xenophobia,
hate speech against immigrants and, in particular,
Islamophobia that in some countries have led to a
number of terrorist acts, targeting particular groups of
civilians whose only crime was to be the other. In a
way, that is in line with all forms of ethnic cleansing.

We appeal to all States to take appropriate measures
to prevent the perpetration of such atrocities in future.

Experience teaches us that, through proper
preparation and a genuine desire to achieve real
consensus, we can enhance the United Nations system
to defend citizens of all groups. Perhaps one of the most
important examples in that regard is Security Council
resolution 2286 (2016), on the protection of health-care
workers and health facilities in armed conflict, which
Egypt, joined by a number of States, drafted during
Egypt’s presidency of the Council in 2016. We believe
that this is the best way to deal with the R2P issue..

(spoke in Arabic): It is my
honour to address the Council today on my own
behalf and on behalf of my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Canada, as co-facilitators for draft
resolution A/73/L.95, entitled “Commemoration of
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the International
Conference on Population and Development”.

The International Conference on Population
and Development, held in Cairo in 1994, and its
Programme of Action are important means to promote
the issue of population. The Conference set out a new
and progressive vision on the relationship between
population and development, and between prosperity
and the rights of the individual. The Conference held
in Cairo saw the adoption by 179 States of the 20-year
Programme of Action, which was extended in 2010,

as a comprehensive indicator of development progress
based on the individual. The Programme of Action was
pivotal in promoting sexual and reproductive health,
the empowerment of women and gender equality,
which are the cornerstones of the population and
development agenda.

The issue of population is the common platform
that forms the basis of the Cairo Programme of Action,
specifically, and other development plans in general.

Success in implementing the Cairo Plan of Action will
certainly bolster efforts to achieve 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Based on all this, Egypt and Canada were keen to
submit a procedural draft resolution to commemorate
25 years since the 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development was held in Cairo. The
draft resolution sets aside an evening session on 16 July
for the General Assembly to commemorate 25 years
of the Conference and to serve as an opportunity to
exchange viewpoints and lessons learned with the aim
of advancing national, regional and international efforts
to expedite the implementation of the outcome of the
Conference and contribute to the Nairobi meeting in
November. We wanted this commemoration to coincide
with the High-level Political Forum so as to benefit
from the high-level participation of Member States and
stakeholders, including the private sector, academia
and civil society, as well as to strengthen links for
implementing the two agendas.

With a view to ensuring good and constructive
relations with all delegations of Member States, in recent

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.

They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

weeks Egypt and Canada have held a series of bilateral
consultations with a large number of them, as well as
with regional groups. During those consultations, we
listened to their proposals and views on the procedural
draft resolution. That was followed by three sessions
of governmental consultations, on 6, 10 and 18 June,
during which we examined the procedural rules and
agreed practices. All those consultations and meetings
have led to the draft resolution in its current form.

In conclusion, on my behalf and on behalf of my
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Canada,
I would like to thank all delegations for their positive
involvement in and support for our efforts as facilitators
of the governmental consultations. We would also like
to thank the delegations that sponsored the procedural
draft resolution. Let me further thank all colleagues in
the Secretariat, the staff of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly and the United Nations
Population Fund for their efforts and sincere cooperation
with the delegations of Egypt and Canada during the
preparation of this procedural draft resolution.

We look forward to seeing the President of the
General Assembly and others on the evening of
16 July to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population
and Development.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.95, entitled
“Commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Conference on Population
and Development”.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.95: Argentina, Australia, Benin,
Cabo Verde, the Central African Republic, Comoros,
Djibouti, Eritrea, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Japan, Lebanon, Libya, Kenya, Kiribati, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Yemen and Zambia.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.95?
Draft resolution A/73/L.95
(resolution 73/303).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of position
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.

(spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of the Arab Republic of Egypt would like
to explain its vote before the voting on draft resolution
A/73/L.94, entitled “Towards torture-free trade:
examining the feasibility, scope and parameters for
possible common international standards”.

Egypt stresses its firm belief that the prevention of
torture and other forms of harsh, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment is an inalienable right under
international human rights law and should not be
breached under any circumstances. Furthermore, we
believe that the prevention of torture is an obligatory
norm of international human rights law.

In principle, we support the measures to promote
international cooperation within the United Nations
with a view to prohibiting goods that are used only for
torture. Egypt would have liked to join the consensus
on the draft resolution had it been accurate enough in
dealing with the main objective of the text, that is, to
put an end to trade in goods used for torture.

However, we would like to take this opportunity to
express our reservations on a number of issues related
to the draft resolution and to the manner in which it was
presented to the General Assembly.

First, not enough time was allocated for
discussing the draft resolution, and it was presented
by the co-sponsors directly in the General Assembly,
bypassing the Third Committee and all other relevant
mechanisms, including the Human Rights Council.

This represents a serious precedent in the handling of
human rights issues at the United Nations.

The delegation of Egypt has on more than one
occasion expressed its reservations on the methods
used in the conduct of the negotiations and on the
failure to take the views of a large number of States into
account, in addition to the lack of necessary data on the
controversial issue of the draft resolution, in spite of the
repeated requests made by many countries during the
relevant negotiations.

Secondly, Egypt’s main reservation on the draft
resolution is reflected in its possible impact on
international trade and the possibility of the use of
common international standards to be clarified in
future as obstacles to trade, as well as setting politicized
and non-neutral conditions on certain States based on
alleged claims regarding their human rights records,
thereby preventing certain goods from reaching them.

Thirdly, the draft resolution clearly links torture
and other forms of harsh, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment on the one hand, and capital
punishment on the other. This linkage has been the goal
of many States in the past with a view to calling for the
abolition of capital punishment, based on the text of the
draft resolution regarding the need to put an end to the
trade of goods related to torture or capital punishment,
despite the rejection of this linkage by a large number
of countries.

Egypt emphasizes that article 6 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights gives States
the sovereign right to apply capital punishment for the
most heinous crimes in accordance with their national
jurisdiction and applicable rules.

In view of the aforementioned reservations, Egypt
will vote against the draft resolution and calls upon
other countries to do the same.