Let me join previous
speakers in congratulating the Secretary-General on
the quality of his report (A/73/898) on the responsibility
to protect (R2P). Ghana aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect (see A/73/PV.93) and is
encouraged by the focus of the report on lessons
learned and taking stock of experience in prevention,
including the role of individual Member States and the
international community, which adequately reflects
the concerns Ghana shares with others regarding the
approach to the implementation of R2PWe just commemorated the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide with a solemn
ceremony in this Hall. It was a moment that reminded
us of how the international community failed to protect
thousands of people in that country from genocide and
mass atrocities. It also brought back haunting memories
of similar crimes against humanity committed
elsewhere across the globe, even in the course of our
own lifetime. This debate, therefore, is important and
provides a forum for Member States to learn from other
experiences in the implementation of R2P.

My delegation continues to endorse the position
that the pace of implementation can be improved
through strengthened mechanisms for accountability
across the legal, moral and political spheres, together
with clearly defined relationships among the three
phases of the principle. Ghana will also continue to
advocate for consensus-building in the transformation
of conflict resolution, including the ongoing processes
of building resilient communities, resilient nations and
resilient regional communities in support of a resilient
global communityIn the multilateral setting, Ghana shares the
concerns raised in the report about the troubling decline
in international commitment to multilateralism, which
is affecting efforts to prevent atrocity crimes, and calls
for a more collaborative effort towards eliminating
this canker of atrocity crimes. In that connection,
Ghana encourages members of the Security Council
to utilize the Council’s working methods in bringing
potential mass atrocity situations into the Council for
consideration as early as possible. We also encourage
frequent briefings from the Secretary-General’s
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Responsibility to Protect regarding early warning
situations where populations are at risk of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. The victims of such crimes deserve better
and we, the international community, must not turn our
backs on them.

It is gratifying to note that the report commends the
efforts being made by the African Union (AU) in the
development of legal and institutional frameworks to
protect populations from serious crimes, as spelled out
in the responsibility to protect. It is worth mentioning
that the Constitutive Act of the AU specifically affirms
the right to intervene in respect of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which hinges on
the responsibility to protect. These are the practical
measures that Ghana is calling for in the protection
of the vulnerable against such heinous crimes. Never
again should the international community sit and watch
innocent populations being annihilated without any
protection. In calling for such protection, Ghana is
mindful of States’ sovereignty, but this sovereignty also
comes with a responsibility. In cases in which States
fail to uphold that responsibility, the vulnerable must
be protected by the international community through
international law.

It is in this context that Ghana continues to work
very closely with the delegations of like-minded States
to protect and promote both national and regional
ownership of R2P, with the support of the joint Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect,
the Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, the
International Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect
and other partners. Ghana calls on Member States that
have yet to appoint national R2P focal points to do so
and join the growing Global Network of R2P Focal
Points. Ghana also wishes to commend the 61 Member
States and two regional organizations — the European
Union and the Organization of American States — that
have appointed R2P focal points to date and are building
their national and collective capacities to prevent mass
atrocity crimesIn conclusion, my delegation wishes to call on
Member States to declare their support for R2P to
allow for all views to be considered in the preparation
of the report and outcome of this debate. Finally, Ghana
wishes to echo its statement made during the previous
debate (see A/72/PV.99), namely, that the combined
effect of the responsibility to protect, the responsibility
while protecting and the responsibility to remember
should help us to make progress in building resilience.