I take the floor to explain
India’s vote on resolution 73/304India remains firmly committed to preventing
torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment or punishment. We firmly believe that freedom
from torture is a human right that must be respected
and protected under all circumstances. Acts of torture
are a punishable offence under various provisions of the
Indian penal code. The Indian judiciary also serves as
a bulwark against any such violations of human rightsResolution 73/304, on torture-free, trade seeks to
establish a link between trade in goods and criminal
acts of torture. It is apparent that the multilateral trading
system is already under stress. In such a situation,
attempts at trade restrictions in a selective manner, as
proposed by resolution 73/304, is likely to raise further
concerns about the implications for the international
trading system. Before starting a process of this nature,
the obligations undertaken by different countries and
the World Trade Organization and other forums also
need to be carefully examined. The current process did
not afford any such opportunity to the Member States.

As for resolution 72/163, Member States are going
to give full consideration to the subject matter of torture
at the forthcoming General Assembly session. That also
includes a range of appropriate measures to be taken
to prevent and prohibit the production, trade, export,
import and use of equipment that has no practical use
other than for torture purposes. The current resolution
may start a duplicate parallel process related to goods
used for torture and capital punishment, and therefore
creates ambiguity by conflating different issuesEvery State has the sovereign right to determine
its own legal system and appropriate legal penalties. In
States where capital punishment is statutorily provided
for, it is exercised after following the due process
of law. Torture is a crime, and therefore unlawfulIn view of the substantive and procedural
inconsistencies, India was unable to support the
resolution 73/304 and abstained in the voting..

Incorporating capital punishment into the scope of
resolution 73/304 raises concerns that it may be an
attempt to place it on par with torture. Any implication
that capital punishment is being treated on par with
torture is unacceptable to my delegation, as in India
capital punishment is a statutory provision, even though
it is used in the rarest of rare cases