As a party to the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman

or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, Indonesia is
committed to the full implementation of the Convention.

Furthermore, Indonesia believes that the international
community should cooperate to fulfil the provisions of
the Convention aimed at preventing and responding to
torture and other ill treatments.

The draft resolution with which we are presented
(A/73/L.94) has an underlying purpose that is not
completely aligned with the Convention. The proponents
seek to end trade in goods used to carry out the death
penalty and torture. This goal is problematic in that it
conflates the death penalty with torture and other ill
treatment, which is an issue of principle. Our national
legislation affirms that the death penalty is a legitimate
form of punishment for the most serious crimes in our
society. It is also justified by international law. It is very
unfortunate that the request by delegations to delete all
references to the death penalty was not accommodated.

We also regret that the proposal to use such inclusive
mechanisms as open-ended working groups was not
accommodated in the draft resolution. The proponent
insisted on the establishment of a group of governmental
experts without a clear mandate, parameters or terms
of reference. Inclusive mechanisms would allow more
experts and Member States to contribute to the process
and increase ownership over the result. We therefore
continue to advocate for the formation of an openended working group.

Turning to the procedural aspects, the way in which
this draft resolution was deliberated seems to confirm
the trend of undermining multilateralism. Consensus
is no longer the norm. The drafting of documents is
merely an exercise in imposition rather than genuine
deliberation. We regret that the draft resolution did not
undergo due process.

First, the three informal consultations, held over
such a short period, were not sufficient to allow for a
meaningful exchange of ideas. Moreover, many of the
questions raised by various delegations, including ours,
were not answered.

Secondly, the strong trade element in the draft
resolution should have been discussed by trade experts
as well. Instead, the consultations were mainly attended
by human rights experts. We argue that this should be
discussed first in Geneva, which hosts both trade and
human rights experts of the United Nations system,
thereby leveraging United Nations expertise.

Thirdly, the draft resolution was not built on the
consensus that is embodied in resolution 72/163, which
we will revisit this year. The resolution already has a
provision to prevent and prohibit the production, trade,
export, import and use of equipment that has no practical
use other than for the purpose of torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

Indonesia is ready to support a consensus-based
process. For the reasons I mentioned, we will not support
the draft resolution and will abstain in the voting..

I would like to begin by
making reference to the 2009 report of the SecretaryGeneral on this subject, which asserts that:
“The task ahead is not to reinterpret or renegotiate
the conclusions of the World Summit but to find
ways of implementing its decisions in a fully
faithful and consistent manner.” (A/63/677, para. 2)
Yet, precisely 10 years after the report, that
particular assertion still has validity in our present time.

My delegation has been engaged in various debates on
this topic, whether under this agenda item or different
settings in the halls of the Organization. A divergence of
views still exists regarding this concept. Nevertheless,
my delegation is also cognizant and appreciative of
the efforts to operationalize the concept and meet the
noble objectives and purposes that it is intended to
serve. Needless to say, there are also stringent views
regarding how to forge a clear and practical modality
for that concept, and in fact, whether it should stand as
an agenda item at all.

In that connection, allow me to recall our position
that the inclusion of this topic as a one-off agenda item
at the seventy-second session of the General Assembly
would be an option for the purpose of enriching
the knowledge of States Members of the United
Nations concerning the strengthening of the primary
responsibility of States. My delegation would therefore
continue to insist that deliberation on this topic should
be on the basis of consensus so that any process that we

choose to advance is one that garners collective support
and ownership, and not the imposition of the few or
even the majority. Against that backdrop, I would like
to make the following points.

First, a few divergent views do exist, particularly
on pillar III, and that requires a careful approach. But,
at the same time, we cannot be complacent with what
we have achieved with pillars I and II. That atrocities
and conflicts are still continuously occurring in many
parts of the world is clear evidence of the lack of
prevention and early-warning mechanism efforts by
the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations
already provides the tools to take such steps, and we
need to exhaust them.

Secondly, the openness of the concept should be in
line with the provisions of the United Nations Charter
that promote peaceful and appropriate diplomatic means,
as well as non-coercive measures. The concept of the
responsibility to protect does not provide justifications
for unilateral action. It reinforces the primacy of
multilateralism, as embodied in the United Nations
Charter, for the assumption of that responsibility.

Thirdly, any effort to establish links between
violations of human rights and the presumed imminence
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or crimes
against humanity should be forged carefully so as to
avoid creating criteria or thresholds that are expansive
or intrusive and could be misleading.

There are indeed divergent views on the practicality
and operationalization of this concept. The politicization
of the concept will only widen such divergence. Instead,
we should focus on concrete cooperation to help build
capacity in the exchange of views and learn from each
other’s experiences. My delegation remains prepared to
positively engage in the discussion of this concept with
the objective of reaching consensus and achieving the
collective engagement of all Member States.