Let me
begin by reaffirming Iran’s unwavering commitment
to the noble goal of the protection of civilians and the
prevention of atrocity crimes. We are party to the 1948
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and fully respect our obligations
arising from the Convention, namely, the duties to
prevent and punish the crime of genocide. We have also
expressed on previous occasions our understanding of
the responsibility to protect (R2P), as enshrined in the
2005 World Summit Outcome. In that connection, I
would like to underline a few points.

The primary responsibility to prevent the
commission of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity lies with sovereign States.

Other States or the international community at large
may step in to help, upon request on a case by case
basis and through the United Nations, to prevent such
horrendous atrocities. In limited cases where the use
of force is required to save the population, R2P falls
within the collective security framework of the United
Nations and can be authorized only by the Security
Council in full compliance with international law and
only as a last resort.

We also took note of some recommendations to
further develop, conceptualize and operationalize
the R2P concept. However, it is premature to discuss
those recommendations, since we are still far from a
consensual understanding of R2P. At the same time,
it seems that there are some attempts to introduce
alternatives to the central role of the United Nations
in this process, such as putting forward the concept of
international leadership of a State, or group of States, to
provide preventive action. Such recommendations give

rise to serious concerns for many countries and could be
easily manipulated, particularly at a time when R2P has
failed the test of objectivity, as well as impartiality, and
is guided by the politicized interests of certain States,
rather than human dignity and rights, and therefore
has been far removed from its alleged objectives and
purposes. In that regard , we reiterate our call that,
prior to the implementation of R2P, it is crucial to
define its normative content and objectives, as well as
its scope of application. Effort in that regard should be
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and
well-established principles of international law.

The prevention of mass atrocity crimes should
remain the core objective of R2P. That, by no means
whatsoever, may be inferred as permitting the use
force against another State under any pretext, such as
humanitarian intervention, which may pave the way
for all manner of politically motivated interventions
in other countries. The objective of R2P should not be
defined as regime change or interference in the internal
affairs of countries.

Prevention should be seen as a long-term strategy,
be interpreted in broad terms and mainly include
non-coercive measures. In that context, R2P should
be seen as a framework to address the root causes
of conflicts and assist vulnerable and failed States
to develop their capacity to protect their populations
and build safer societies. Prevention involves a broad
range of issues from the promotion of sustainable
development, education and health to the eradication of
poverty, marginalization and discrimination.

In addition to efforts to increase the resilience of
societies by addressing the root causes of conflicts
through capacity-building, Member States should stop
selling arms to volatile regions. The conduct of arms
exporters among proponents of R2P raises profound
scepticism with regard to their seriousness and honesty
concerning the noble objective of the protection of
civilians. The question arises as to how those countries
are fulfilling their obligations vis-à-vis the protection
of the population while simultaneously selling arms
with the prior knowledge or experience that those arms
will eventually end up being used to target innocent
civilians and will ultimately lead to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

It is unfortunate that civilian populations have
been attacked in recent years, in their homes, schools,
hospitals and even in public ceremonies, such as

funerals and weddings. The devastating experiences
of the past decade in the Middle East and Africa,
which have highly contributed to the regeneration
and expansion of terrorism and extremism in affected
countries and the world as a whole, expose the
consequences of irresponsible protection. Irresponsible
military interventions have created a breeding ground
for those menaces to thrive.

Last but not least, the only way to restore R2P
and its legitimacy is to end the selectivity and double
standards, as well as genuinely address the plight of
humankind, whenever the latter faces atrocity crimes,
in full conformity with the principles and objectives of
the Charter. We should draw lessons from the tragic
and horrible Rwanda genocide, define humanity and
human dignity as the only driver of R2P and put aside
political interests and considerations. Addressing the
misery of people under foreign occupation is the most
immediate test for R2P.

In conclusion, notwithstanding the formal
discussions that have taken place in the General
Assembly, we are still far from a consensual
understanding of the R2P implementation. The
formal discussion in the General Assembly is not an
appropriate format to address existing conceptual
differences among Member States. We reiterate our
call that reverting to informal interactive dialogue, as
agreed in 2009, could be more beneficial in achieving
consensus on this controversial concept.