Italy aligns itself with the
statements delivered by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.

At the outset, Italy would like to express its
gratitude for the advocacy on the responsibility to
protect (R2P) that the Secretary-General continues to
provide, including through his annual reports.

and Mexican declaration on refraining voluntarily from
the use of the veto. We support the Secretary-General’s
2019 report on the responsibility to protect (A/73/898).

Prevention and early action are of the essence. We
need to implement this principle by strengthening the
rule of law and ensuring accountability for past atrocity
crimes, supporting the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDG 16, but
also by securing proper livelihoods, as economic risk is
one of the main triggers for atrocity crimes.

Addressing the root causes of such crimes is a big
part of the solution. That is why we see great merit
in a cross-cutting strategy linking the various United
Nations agendas, from the protection of civilians
to women and peace and security, from sustainable
development to the wider human rights agenda
and peacekeeping.

Prevention is also about detecting the early signs
of potential disruption. Atrocity crimes do not happen
overnight, as the Special Envoy correctly pointed out;
they are carefully prepared and organized. Hate speech
plays a big role in the build-up to atrocity crimes. We
therefore commend the leadership of Under-SecretaryGeneral Adama Dieng in the elaboration of the
United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech, which is a much-needed and timely step in the
right direction.

I would also like to congratulate the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect, Karen Smith, for her
active leadership, and to thank the Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, for his
tireless efforts.

We need to strengthen civil society and recognize
the paramount role of women in building pluralistic,
inclusive societies that provide the best protection
against mass atrocities. Protecting women is a categorical
imperative, especially when sexual and gender-based
violence are increasingly used as a deliberate political
strategy by State and non-State perpetrators.

We welcomed the inclusion of the responsibility to
protect in the formal agenda of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session, and we support its inclusion
as a standing item in the Assembly’s agenda.

We are all called upon to step up our efforts to
defend human rights and uphold our responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

The principle of a shared responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes
against humanity and war crimes should continue
to inspire our action today, when we are facing a
general erosion of respect for international law. The
Security Council has a clear responsibility in this
respect. We support the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group’s code of conduct and the French

Italy continues to do its part: we have consistently
been a strong supporter of R2P in the Security Council
and as a former Chair of the Group of Friends on
the Responsibility to Protect, and we remain fully
committed at this time of escalating international
tensions. As the top Western troop-contributing
country for peacekeeping operations, we believe that
the effective protection of civilians requires properly

trained troops, adequate equipment and a strong
political commitment.

Since 2005, through the Center of Excellence for
Stability Police Units in Vicenza, we have trained more
than 10,000 police personnel units, many of which have
deployed in peacekeeping operations in Africa.

We joined the Circle of Leadership on the
Prevention of and Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse in United Nations Operations launched by the
Secretary-General, and we are the largest contributor to
the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Victims of
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. We have appointed an
R2P national focal point, and we encourage all Member
States and regional organizations to do the same.

Finally, at the end of May, Italy hosted a conference
in Rome on SDG 16 in preparation for the upcoming
High-level Political Forum, and we were pleased
to welcome the Special Envoy, who stressed the
fundamental link between SDG 16 and R2P.

Italy will continue to work in this direction and will
continue to support the efforts of the United Nations to
ensure that our founding values remain at the basis of
our societies.