At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this debate. I also commend the engagement
of eight Member States — Afghanistan, Denmark,
Guatemala, the Netherlands, Romania, Rwanda,
Ukraine and Uruguay — for bringing this agenda to
a formal debate at the General Assembly, together
with JapanThe number of attacks on medical staff and
facilities are on the rise, and forced displacement is at
an all-time high. Sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict has also increased significantly. It is therefore
all the more important for all Member States to discuss
how the international community can prevent atrocities
from taking place, and what concrete actions each
Member State can take to achieve that end. Today I
will talk about Japan’s contribution in the area of the
responsibility to protect with regard to the assistance
we provide to other Member States with a view to
preventing atrocities.

I agree with the mention in this year’s report of
the Secretary-General (A/73/898) of the provision of
support to national authorities. Japan believes that
strengthening the capacity of security and judiciary
sectors at the national level and empowering women
would ensure the protection of human rights, improve
the planning and management of criminal justice
related to institutions and contribute to the stabilization
of the situation on the ground, and thereby help to
prevent atrocity crimes. Japan has been an active player
in the field, assisting national efforts of Member States
to protect their people through the mobilization of our
official development assistance for capacity-building
and the protection of women.

First, with regard to our contribution to capacitybuilding in the security and judiciary sectors, I am
proud to share with colleagues today that Japan will
continue to lend assistance through its training course
“Criminal Justice for French-Speaking African
Countries” for another five years, starting this yearThe programme is designed to support participants
from African countries — namely, Burkina Faso,
Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and
Senegal — who work in the field criminal justiceSecondly, with regard to providing assistance
for the protection of women, Japan has been working
closely with UN-Women as well as the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
regarding women’s leadership, empowerment, access
and protection in Kenya, Egypt, Iraq and Jordan and
on projects to address sexual violence in conflict in
Iraq, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In August, we will host the
seventh Tokyo International Conference on African
Development in Yokohama, Japan, where we will
discuss how to strengthen peace and stability as one of
the pillars, as well as the issues that I just mentioned.

We strongly believe that the collective efforts of the
international community in such areas will help to
advance the implementation of the prevention agendaThirdly, in addition to the assistance that I just
mentioned, I would like to add that Japan believes
that the Security Council should play an active role in
preventing conflicts. Unfortunately, we have witnessed
some cases where the Security Council failed to fulfil
its function to prevent or end mass atrocities owing to
the use of the veto. In that regard, I emphasize that Japan
continues to support the initiative by France and Mexico
on veto restraint in cases of mass atrocities, as well as
the code of conduct developed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency GroupWe should all redouble our efforts to protect people
from atrocities. The international community needs to
take stock of past practices and share lessons learned, as
the Secretary-General mentions in his report. Japan is
ready to collaborate with the international community
on this critical issue..

I would like to explain the
position of the Government of Japan on draft resolution
A/73/L.94We find two serious issues in the draft resolution:
first is the reference to the death penalty and the second
the reference to the legitimacy of trade regulationsArticle 2 of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment stipulates State parties’ obligation to
prevent acts of torture in any territory under their
jurisdiction. No exceptional circumstances whatsoever
may be invoked as a justification of tortureThe prevention of torture is well established under
international human rights law. The international
community should act in concert to ensure that such
prevention is implemented. Japan has no objection
to discussing possible measures to prevent torture.

However, there is no universal understanding that the
death penalty constitutes an act of torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It is up
to the national criminal justice system of each Member
State to either abolish or retain the death penaltyAddressing the death penalty and torture in the
same draft resolution leads to confusion concerning
the two issues. That confusion not only gives rise to
unconstructive friction between Member States but also
makes it difficult to take coordinated action towards
the prevention of tortureMy delegation has constructively engaged in
informal negotiations, offering concrete amendment
proposals on the understanding that the deletion of
references to the death penalty with a strong focus on
the prevention of torture would be a precondition for
the discussion of trade regulationsFor that reason, Japan will vote against the
draft resolution..

Many countries expressed similar concerns
during the negotiations. However, the co-sponsors
did not offer the opportunity for sufficient dialogue
on these important concerns and did not accept the
draft amendments. Under these circumstances, today’s
action on the draft resolution in the General Assembly
is deeply regrettableMy delegation cannot accept the current text,
which addresses torture and the death penalty in the
same sentence