Myanmar is against any form
of torture and does not condone any such violationsHowever, my delegation voted against resolution
73/304 because we have strong reservations on the
establishment of such common international standards
where there is no common position on the issue. We
believe that any attempts to regulate trade by setting
standards on the pretext of human rights will undermine
free trade. We also share serious concerns with other
countries over the lack of transparency in the process
of negotiations on the resolution. The negotiations were
carried out in haste and without allowing sufficient
time for representatives to consult with the relevant
trade bodies or expertsWe will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution..

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.

My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
2019 report, entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons
learned for prevention” (A/73/898)Myanmar shares with many delegations the concern
over the lack of progress and consensus on the concept
of the responsibility to protect (R2P) while recognizing
the importance of the prevention of atrocity crimesAlthough we have been engaged in intensive debates
on the concept for more than a decade, we have yet to
agree on how to translate it into practice. There remains
a serious divergence among Member States even on
the interpretation of the principle of the responsibility
to protect.

The Secretary-General’s report for this year
emphasizes the importance of prevention. My
delegation could not agree more. Preventive measures
can be in many forms. Any potential cause of possible
atrocity crimes should be preventedIn that regard, I would like to underline the primary
responsibility of the State in taking the necessary
measures to prevent imminent threats of atrocitiesSuch measures include, but are not limited to, the
peaceful resolution of conflict, strengthening the
rule of law, the promotion of human rights, building
peace and harmony among citizens and socioeconomic
development. Regional organizations and the
international community should render assistance or
expertise to countries that need to strengthen their
domestic capacity in order to fulfil their responsibility.

In that respect, countries should develop the
policies and mechanisms best suited to their own
situations in order to prevent conflict and ensure the
peaceful settlement of disputes. National ownership
must be ensured in preventing atrocity crimesIn applying the concept of R2P, the universally
accepted principles of respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of States,
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
must be upheld. We must not allow the principle of R2P
to be abused or hijacked by any particular country or
group of countries for their political purposesThe 2005 World Summit Outcome document
clearly states that the application of the responsibility to
protect is strictly limited to genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. It is crucial that
judging or categorizing a situation as a specific atrocity
crime or deciding to invoke R2P must be done based
on well-founded, unbiased and factual information and
with impartiality, accuracy and objectivityThe individual State has the primary responsibility
to protect and to prevent atrocity crimes. The
international community can also assist States in a
constructive and positive manner in shouldering their
responsibility in good faith. Invoking the concept of R2P
for political purposes with ill intent will undermine the
core value and purpose of the responsibility to protect..

Moreover, overemphasizing the role of international
legal institutions undermines the role of national
institutions. The role of international institutions
should complement rather than compete with the duty
of the Government and the interests of the people of
that particular nationAddressing hate speech is an essential measure
for preventing tension and conflicts. My delegation
therefore welcomes the launching of the United
Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate SpeechThe international community and the global network of
mainstream and social media should also act responsibly
in not promoting hatred and conflict