UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Joint Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, and Karen Smith, United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility to
Protect, on the situation in northeast Syrian Arab Republic
(New York, 15 October 2019) United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Adama Dieng, and the United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Karen
Smith, expressed their alarm over the current situation in northeast Syria following the launch of
a military operation by Turkey on 09 October.

The Special Advisers stated that “the civilians of Syria continue to live through one of the worst
conflicts of our time, with repeated violations of their basic rights and protections guaranteed
under international law. This latest escalation of the conflict again puts civilians at grave risk.

The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights has reported on several civilian
casualties, including allegations of summary executions, and humanitarian actors report that at
least 160,000 civilians have been displaced in the six days since the start of the military
operation.”
The Special Advisers stressed that Turkish authorities and all parties to the conflict in Syria need
to ensure strict adherence to the legal obligation to protect civilians. This is the responsibility of
all State and non-State actors. No civilian should be forced to leave their home against their will.

In addition, any return of refugees needs to be voluntary and when conditions are safe for them
to do so sustainably. The Special Advisers also urged the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to do more to uphold the responsibility to protect civilians in the
Syrian conflict. The repeated failure of the Security Council to speak with a united voice and to
take action to protect civilian populations at risk of serious violations goes against the
responsibility to protect principle, a commitment made by all Member States.

The Special Advisers reiterated calls for de-escalation and for a political solution to the Syria
crisis stating that “far too many civilians have already been victims of atrocity crimes in Syria
since the start of the conflict in 2011 and millions of Syrians remain at risk of these crimes. Until
there is a sustainable political solution to the crisis, one in which all communities in the country
have a voice and their rights can be protected, the risk of atrocity crimes remains a reality”.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
Email: osapg@un.org
http://www.un.org/genocideprevention.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Joint Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, and Karen Smith, United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility to
Protect, on attacks against religious minorities in Sri Lanka
(New York, 13 May 2019) Recalling their recent statements against violent extremism and hate
speech, the United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and
the United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Karen Smith are alarmed
about the growing acts of violence on the basis of religion, including attacks against homes,
places of worship and businesses, in the North Western Province of Sri Lanka.

The Special Advisers noted a recent spate of attacks against Muslim and Christian communities
in Sri Lanka, a majority Buddhist country. The attacks committed on this weekend of 11 May
follow deadly attacks carried out on Easter Sunday of 21 April 2019, against churches and hotels
in various parts of the country in which more than 200 people were killed and hundreds were
injured. The recent violence in Sri Lanka has highlighted a growing influence of nationalist and
extremist views of identity in the Asia region, putting religious minorities at risk.

The Special Advisers stated that “it is in the interest of all ethnic and religious groups in Sri
Lanka, as well as the Government, the opposition, civil society and the security sector, to work
collaboratively in taking appropriate action and immediately stop these hateful attacks. The
country is trying to move forward from a traumatic period of inter-ethnic armed conflict, but
these attacks are pushing Sri Lanka backwards. If not adequately dealt with, the recent violence
has the potential to escalate even further.”
The Special Advisers acknowledged and welcomed the swift response of the Government,
including by deploying the security forces to protect affected communities and addressing the
spread of false information and incitement to violence. They also encouraged the Government to
make sure that these and other past similar attacks are fully investigated and those responsible
for instigating or committing these violent acts are brought to justice and made accountable.

They added that “the Government needs to give the example that it will not tolerate the spread of
prejudice and hate among groups within its population. This needs to be done at national and
local level, by putting an end to local discriminatory practices that perpetuate religious
intolerance and violence”. Mr. Dieng and Ms. Smith also offered their support to work with the
Government on inter-faith and inter-religious harmony and inclusivity.

The Special Advisers concluded by stating that “Sri Lanka has a pluralistic society. To be a Sri
Lankan is to be a Buddhist, to be Hindu, to be a Muslim, to be a Christian. All these
communities are entitled to their identity, to freely exercise their religion and to live in peace and
security in Sri Lanka, as recognized by the country’s Constitution. We call on all Sri Lankans to
respect one another.”

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
Email: osapg@un.org
http://www.un.org/genocideprevention.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the United Nations Statement by Adama
Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, on the situation in
central Mali
For Immediate Release
(New York, 27 March 2019) The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
Adama Dieng, expressed his deepest concern and strongly condemns the attack on Ogossagou
Peulh village, Mopti region, in central Mali, on 23rd March 2019 in which, at least 134 civilians,
including women and children, were killed and at least 55 people were injured. This is the fourth
major attack since the start of the year against villages populated by Fulani/Peulhs in Bankass
cercle including the one that took place on 1st January in Kolougon Peulh in which 37 civilians
were killed.

The Office of the Special Adviser has been closely monitoring the situation in Mali since the
beginning of 2018 and has received reports indicating a serious upsurge in inter-communal
violence as well as negative impact of counterterrorism operations conducted by community-based
armed groups on the civilian populations in the region. There is growing ethnicization of the
conflict in central Mali, in which entire communities are being stigmatized as terrorists or as
affiliates of armed groups. This dynamic is not sufficiently recognized neither by national
authorities nor by the international community, who are focusing mostly on the peace process in
the north and on the threat posed by jihadist movements. The community based armed groups and
other armed actors have been carrying out targeted attacks against civilians in the context of the
fight against terrorism, committing serious violations and abuses of human rights including killings,
destruction of property, arbitrary detention and de facto embargos on villages, restricting
movement of civilian populations.

“Over the recent months, violence has reached unprecedented level amid retaliatory attacks and
serious violations of human rights in central Mali impacting on all communities. Unless these
concerns are immediately addressed, there is a high risk of further escalation of the situation in
which atrocity crimes could be committed.” Mr. Dieng said
To prevent further escalation of violence, the Special Adviser urges the Malian government, with
the support of the the international community, including MINUSMA to immediately address the
current grave upsurge of violence in central Mali and to provide, with no further delay, protection
as well as assistance to vulnerable population. “I call on the Malian government to urgently
investigate and prosecute the perpetrators of the recent attacks as well as those responsible for
serious violations and abuses of human rights.” Mr. Dieng reiterated. The Special Adviser also
called on the authorities and all Malians to prevent and refrain from stigmatizing entire
communities. The Office of the Special Adviser stands ready to provide support to local
reconciliation and inter-communal dialogue processes, with the aim of promoting inclusivity,
strengthening resilience and social cohesion.

French release:
Statement of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama
Dieng, on the situation in central Mali
For Immediate Release
(New York, March 27, 2019) The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng,
expressed deep concern and strongly condemns the attack of March 23, 2019 the village
Ogossagou of Fulani, in the region of Mopti in central Mali in which at least 134 civilians,
including women and children, were killed and at least 55 other people were injured.

This is the fourth major attack since the beginning of the year against villages Fulani / Peul
in Bankass, including the one that took place on January 1, 2019 to Kolougon Fulani, the
during which 37 civilians were killed.

The Office of the Special Adviser following closely the situation in Mali since early 2018 and received
reports of a serious upsurge in intercommunal violence and
the negative impact of operations against terrorism by armed groups
Community based on the civilian population of the region. The conflict in central Mali has a
ethnic character will be accentuated, resulting in entire communities stigmatized
as terrorists or as affiliated with armed groups. This dynamic is not
sufficiently recognized either by national authorities or by the international community, which
focus mainly on the peace process in the north and on the threat posed by
jihadists. Armed groups in community-based and other armed actors
conducting targeted attacks against civilians in the context of the fight against terrorism,
committing serious violations and abuses of human rights, including killings,
destruction of property, arbitrary arrest and embargos de facto villages, hampering
movement of civilians.

"In recent months, violence has reached unprecedented levels with violent reprisals
and serious violations of human rights in central Mali, affecting all
communities. Unless a response is immediately brought to this situation
concern, there will be a high risk that the situation is deteriorating and that later
crime can be committed atrocities. "Said Mr. Dieng.

To prevent further escalation of violence, the Special Adviser urges the government
Mali, with the support of the international community, including MINUSMA to tackle
immediately the serious rise of ongoing violence in central Mali and ensuring,
without delay, protection and assistance necessary to vulnerable populations. " I call
the Malian government to urgently investigate and prosecute the perpetrators of
recent attacks and the serious violations of human rights leaders "reiterated
Dieng. The Special Adviser also called on the authorities and all Malians to prevent and
to prevent stigmatization of communities. The Office of the Special Adviser is ready to provide
support to the process of local reconciliation and intercommunity dialogue in order
promote inclusion, strengthening resilience and social cohesion.

For questions, please contact:
Juliette Lehner Office for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/fr/genocideprevention/
Email: juliette.lehner@un.org

For media queries please Contact:
Juliette Lehner Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/
Email: juliette.lehner@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the United Nations
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, on the appeal judgement of Radovan
Karadzic for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
(New York, - 20 March 2019) The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, acknowledged today’s final appeal judgement by the Hague Branch of the Mechanism
for International Criminal Tribunals (Mechanism) largely upholding the verdict issued on 24
March 2016 by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
against Radovan Karadzic and increasing his sentence from 40 years to life imprisonment. As
President of the Republika Srpksa and Supreme Commander of the Bosnian Serb Army from
1992 to 1996, Mr. Karadzic has been found guilty of genocide for the 1995 Srebrenica
massacre, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Special Adviser Dieng underlined that this appeal judgement confirms that accountability
rather than impunity will prevail. Justice alone, however, will not bring genuine
reconciliation to communities divided by violence, and it cannot be imposed from the
outside. “Real change in society can only come from self-reflection, acceptance, consistent
and collective effort to move forward. It takes hard work and perseverance. It also takes
sustained commitment to reconciliation, trust-building and constructive and meaningful
dialogue by political and social leaders and citizens.”
In February 2018, Special Adviser Dieng visited Srebrenica, Donja Gradina and the Partisan
Memorial Cemetery in Mostar to pay tribute to all victims. As he did then, Special Adviser
Dieng reiterates his concerns at ongoing attempts to deny the gravity of the crimes committed
in Srebrenica, including glorification of war crimes. This includes the naming of a student
dormitory after Karadzic at the University of East Sarajevo.

During his visit, he consistently underscored that “genocide denial is a direct barrier to
reconciliation.” The ICTY has determined, conclusively, that the crime of genocide was
committed in Srebrenica in 1995. The International Court of Justice as well as national courts
have consistently reached the same conclusion.

Special Adviser Dieng urges leaders in the region to combat and counter negative and
divisive rhetoric with words of compassion and empathy toward the pain and suffering of
victims, not only of their own ethnic or religious community, but specially members of other
ethnic or religious communities.

Special Adviser Dieng underlines that “Mr. Karadzic is not a hero, he is a criminal. The true
heroes are the survivors and witnesses of the crimes committed by him. They have displayed
immense courage by coming to the courts to testify and never gave up hope that they would
see justice.”
Today, denial and revisionism are feeding regional instability and undermining neighbourly
relations. “Some leaders and governing institutions in the region have not yet shown that they
have the courage to support accountability for the crimes committed in the past nor to
acknowledge those wrongdoings. More needs to be done to strengthen genuine reconciliation,
trust-building and to promote constructive dialogue.”
The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide expresses the conviction that
“accountability constitutes an essential element in building a more peaceful and stable future
in the joint pursuit of truth and genuine reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
entire region.”
*****

For media queries please contact:
Fredrik von Bothmer, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/
Email: vonbothmer@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, on the draft reforms to the Law on National
Reconciliation, Guatemala.

(New York, 12 March 2019) The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, urges members of Congress in Guatemala to reject draft legislation to review the
1996 Law on National Reconciliation. He also expresses grave concern about the serious
consequences that the approval of such draft legislation would have in the stability of the
country and the cohesion of Guatemala’s society.

The draft legislation that is before the Guatemalan Congress would grant amnesty with
retroactive effects to all those convicted or awaiting trial for international crimes
committed in Guatemala during the country’s civil war from 1960 to 1996. This would
include the crime of genocide and crimes against humanity. If approved in its current
format, the draft legislation would also terminate ongoing investigations and judicial
processes and prevent all future investigations into human rights violations and
international crimes committed during that period.

The draft proposal is a clear violation of Article 46 of the Constitution of Guatemala and
of the obligations Guatemala has voluntarily committed to under international law,
including the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, to
which Guatemala is a party. Among other, the Convention establishes clear obligations to
investigate, prosecute and punish the crime of genocide. Similar obligations in relation to
other international crimes exist in international treaties to which Guatemala is a party.

According to the Special Adviser, “the draft proposal is a very serious retraction of the
achievements Guatemala has made in the pursuit for justice for the crimes committed
during a very dark period of its history”. He highlighted that despite many challenges and
delays throughout the years, recent rulings in the cases of Sepur Zarco, Molina Theissen
and Dos Erres have showcased how a country can work towards overcoming a legacy of
war and impunity and, in this way, contribute to the prevention of future crimes.

The Special Adviser added that “the trial for genocide of former de facto Head of State
Efrain Rios Montt in Guatemalan national courts a few years ago, sent a strong message
to the world that justice can prevail and that no one is above the law. That was the first
country where a national court held a trial of a former Head of State on charges of
genocide. But what message and example will Guatemala be sending now if this draft
legislation is approved? That impunity and not justice will prevail after all? This would
constitute an affront to the victims, an infringement of their rights and a risk to their
security”.

The Special Adviser explained that accountability for past crimes is a basic right of
victims and their families to obtain justice and other forms of redress for what they
endured. Moreover, it is also a critical tool for peace and security. Accountability rebuilds
the social fabric of societies and strengthens reconciliation processes. It recognizes the
suffering of the victims and communities involved and prevents feelings of frustration,
revenge and mistrust that could be politicized or used to incite or justify further violence.

The Special Adviser concluded by saying that “Guatemala needs to rebuild the
confidence of the population in its State institutions. For that, Guatemala must strengthen
the respect for the rule of law. Where there is accountability, populations can be hopeful
that their State, which might have failed them in the past, will now protect them. A blank
amnesty represents an erosion of that trust and could negatively affect ongoing efforts for
reconciliation in the country. I urge all members of Congress to reflect very seriously
about the impact of their decision, to make sure that Guatemala continues building upon
its efforts to fight impunity, and that the country remains an example to the world in the
pursuit of justice.”
END
* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Claudia Diaz, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
www.un.org/genocideprevention
Email: diazc@un.org