Joint Statement by the United Nations Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the
Responsibility to Protect and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict on Attacks Against Civilians in Central Mali
New York, 12 June 2019 – The three senior UN Official[i] condemn the unspeakable attack of 9 June
2019 against the village of Sobanou-Kou in the Mopti region of central Mali in which dozens of civilians
have been killed, the vast majority being women and children. They deplore the high number of civilian
casualties in Mopti region since the beginning of the year, including the 1 January attack against
Koulougon village that killed 39 civilians and the 23 March attack against Ogossagou village, in which at
least 157 civilians were killed. They call for immediate actions to deescalate tensions, particularly the
cycle of intercommunal and ethnic violence and retaliatory attacks that have been unfolding in central
Mali. They urge the Malian government to swiftly undertake a credible investigation into all the
atrocities committed in Mali and bring the perpetrators to justice.

“It is urgent to prevent further violence and brutality and to protect the civilian population from such
grave violations, especially women and children who are among the most vulnerable in times of
conflict,” they said. “Accountability is instrumental in the pursuit of peace and stability and the Malian
authorities, with the support of the international community, must step up to address the growing
insecurity in central Mali.”
The details of this attack have yet to be clarified, but civilians caught in the spiral of violence have been
paying a heavy price since 2018, leading to the killing of hundreds of people since the beginning of the
year, increasingly framed along ethnic lines.

“As we recently stated in our statement on 27 March following the attack of Ogossagou Peulh village,
we are extremely alarmed by the ethnically motivated attacks against civilians in central in Mali as
demonstrated in this recent attack against the Dogon community,” the UN Officials stated. “We cannot
stand by silently in the face of ethnic-based violence, human rights violations and abuses. We call on the
authorities and all parties involved, including the international community, to fulfill their responsibility
to prevent atrocity crimes and protect civilians,” the Officials reiterated.

In addition, more than 800 schools remain closed in northern and central Mali, the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and protection to thousands of people in need has been hampered, making
communities even more vulnerable to instability and exposed to serious violations.

The UN Officials call on the Malian Government, with the support of the international community, to
discharge its primary responsibility to protect and address the root causes of violence and ensure that
vulnerable population, including boys and girls, are provided with the appropriate protection and
assistance. They further stressed that accountability for serious human rights violations, local

reconciliation and the full implementation of the peace agreement of 2015 are the only sustainable
ways to ensure lasting peace and protection of the civilian population.

[i] The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, the UN Special
Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Ms. Karen Smith, and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba.

For more information, please Contact:
Juliette Lehner, United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility
to Protect: juliette.lehner@un.org +1 917 367-7138
Fabian Vinet, Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, vinet@un.org+1917 288-5791

****
Joint Declaration of the United Nations Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
responsibility to protect and of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and
armed conflict on the attacks on civilians in the center of Mali

New York, June 12, 2019 - Three United Nations officials [i] condemn the attack
unspeakable of June 9, 2019 against the village of Sobanou Kou, in the Mopti region in central
Mali, during which dozens of civilians were killed, including the vast majority of women and
children. They deplored the high number of civilian casualties in the Mopti region since the beginning of
year, including the attack of January 1 against the village of Koulougon, which killed 39
civilians and the attack of March 23 against the village of Ogossagou, in which at least 157 people
killed. They called for immediate action to reduce tensions, particularly the cycle
communal and ethnic violence, including attacks and reprisals taking place
in central Mali. They urge the Malian government to quickly open a credible investigation
the atrocities committed in Mali and to bring those responsible to justice.

"It is urgent to prevent further violence and abuse and protect the civilian population against
serious violations, especially women and children who rely on the most vulnerable
conflict period, "they said. "The responsibility is essential in the search for peace and
stability and the Malian authorities, with the support of the international community, must
intensify their efforts to address the growing insecurity in central Mali. "
Details of the attack have not yet been clarified but the civilians caught in the spiral of violence pay
a heavy toll since 2018 with the murder of hundreds of people since the beginning of the year of
increasingly framed along ethnic lines.

"As we recently indicated in our statement of 27 March following the attack
Village Ogossagou Fulani, we are extremely alarmed by the ethnic attacks
against civilians in central Mali, as evidenced by the recent attack against the
Dogon community, "said the UN officials. "We can not remain silent
ethnic violence, violations of human rights and abuse. We urge the authorities and
all parties involved, including the international community to fulfill their
responsibility to prevent heinous crimes and protect civilians, "recalled officials.

More than 800 schools are also still closed in northern and central Mali. The assistance
humanitarian and protection to thousands of people in need have been hampered, making
communities even more vulnerable to instability and exposed to serious violations.

UN officials call the Malian government, with the support of the community
international, in discharging its primary responsibility to protect and to tackle
root causes of violence while ensuring that vulnerable populations, including
boys and girls, enjoy the protection and assistance required. They also recall that
The court action for serious violations of human rights, community reconciliation
and full implementation of the 2015 peace agreement remain the only means of ensuring peace
sustainability and protection of the civilian population.

__________________________
[I] Mr. Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the United Nations for the Prevention of Genocide, Karen
Smith, Special Advisor of the United Nations the responsibility to protect, and Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and Armed Conflict.

For more information please contact:
Juliette Lehner, the United Nations Office for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
Protect: +1 917-367-7138 juliette.lehner@un.org
Fabian Vinet, Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Children and
armed conflicts, vinet@un.org +1 917-288-5791