My delegation is taking the
floor to deliver an explanation of vote after the voting.

Pakistan engaged constructively in the drafting of
resolution 73/304, which was presented by Romania.

Pakistan is firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Torture is an abhorrent practice that violates human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Pakistan, as party
to the Convention against Torture, is firmly committed
to the implementation of all its provisions. Pakistan’s
commitment to prohibiting torture is also guaranteed
under article 42 of Pakistan’s Constitution.

Promoting human rights and preventing torture
is an important component of the global human rights
regime. Resolution 73/304, unfortunately, is not
consistent with the highest international standards that
the international human rights regime has established. It
falls woefully short of requisite human rights standards.

A resolution of the General Assembly on
establishing common international standards on such

a topic requires due deliberation and due process.

Regrettably, neither were deliberations held in a timely,
substantive and transparent manner, nor did the process
of finalizing the resolution take on board concerns
expressed by an array of cross-regional Member
States during consultations. We regret that none of
our concerns and proposals or those of many other
delegations, which we supported, were taken on board
by the facilitators.

The association between trade and human rights is
not a new concept, but it does not command consensus
among Member States. Also, establishing common
international standards for the trade of equipment has
no linkage with preventing torture. That idea lacks
empirical evidence. Using trade agreements to impose
specific values and norms is not the right way to address
human rights issues. On the contrary, theory and the
available evidence suggest that the growth of the free
trade system promotes human rights.

Finally, Pakistan rejects the attempt, through
the resolution, to create a linkage between the death
penalty and torture. The death penalty is ordered as a
result of due process of the law under national criminal
justice systems for the most serious crimes. It is
acceptable under the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. Article 6 of the Covenant clearly
states that a sentence of death may be imposed for only
the most serious crimes in accordance with the law in
force at the time of the commission of the crime and
not contrary to the provisions of the present Covenant.

Furthermore, every country has the sovereign right
under international law to decide its own criminal
justice system based on its international circumstances.

For the reasons I mentioned, Pakistan was unable to
join the consensus on the resolution and voted against
it. Pakistan also disassociates itself from the resolution
and requests the General Assembly to reflect that in
its record..

Pakistan’s delegation thanks
you, Madam President, for having convened this
meeting of the General Assembly on the responsibility
to protect (R2P) and the prevention of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

But the responsibility to protect as a principle
evokes differing responses. We feel that maintaining
the fragile consensus on the issue is critical. Any
reinterpretation of this understanding or initiatives
lacking broad support are counterproductive and
should be avoided. That is why we have been concerned
at the way this process has developed since we met in
what was characterized as a “one-off” plenary meeting
in June 2018. Our focus should be on bridging the
substantive gaps between respective positions rather
than on specific modalities to hold these discussions.

Paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document provide the cornerstone
of our collective commitment to prevent genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

That responsibility to protect is in essence a political
expression of what is already an obligation for States,
as their sovereign responsibility to their citizens.

While some have attempted to project this re-iteration

of the existing provisions of international law into
a new legal instrument, we believe that is misplaced
and unwarranted.

For if there is one lesson to be readily drawn from
the depressing litany of failures of the international
community in recent years, it is not the lack of legal
means to prevent egregious crimes, but instead the lack
of political will to do so. Despite enthusiastic espousal
by its proponents, there is scant little to suggest that the
notion of the responsibility to protect has catalysed into
an abiding change in the disposition of Member States.

In fact, as decisions by the international community
continue to betray the high standards of objectivity and
impartiality, the already fledgling edifice of R2P has
become more tenuous.

If we are indeed to stem that tide, what is needed
is to summon our collective resolve and our collective
will and to act in a consistent and uniform manner
towards all transgressions. Otherwise, the purity of
motive notwithstanding, the resultant actions will
continue to lack the legal and moral legitimacy to gain
wider acceptability.

If the notion of the responsibility to protect is indeed
to become the voice of conscience of the international
community, we must all play our part. Foremost in
that regard, we should not allow human suffering to
be selectively prioritized for political convenience, or
to serve narrow interests. There cannot be any moral
ambivalence on this issue. Therefore, as much as we
express our deep concern at the plight of people caught
up in conflict, we cannot become oblivious to the wellbeing of those who have been forced to flee their homes
and seek protection and shelter elsewhere. They cannot
be left to the mercy of the elements, or contained beyond
high walls of exclusion or separation.

Similarly, our declarations on human rights will
remain unfulfilled without highlighting the systematic
and gross violations of fundamental human rights,
in particular in occupied territories, which relate
to issues that are the subject of repeated Security
Council resolutions.

As we approach the landmark seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, my delegation
considers that the best measure of our commitment to
the vulnerable is to recommit ourselves to the abiding
values of the Charter of the United Nations, which we
commemorated yesterday in such an elegant ceremony,
based on the inherent dignity and worth of the individual

and the provision of fundamental human rights,
including the right of peoples to self-determination.

Secondly, the Charter’s vision of achieving a
life of dignity for all is postulated on international
cooperation and the harmonization of policies within
the United Nations. That objective can be best served
by operationalizing the principle of the right to
development, which encompasses the right to food,
shelter, fair terms of trade, debt relief and adequate
access to financing and technology. After all, in a world
beset by socioeconomic inequalities, many situations
that lead to turmoil and conflict are the result of
deprivation, underdevelopment and poverty.

Thirdly, a prevention-centric focus must be
prioritized as the cornerstone of any protection-oriented
approach, for it costs far more to pick up the pieces after
a crisis than it does to prevent one. We have taken note
of the useful lessons learned for prevention drawn by
the Secretary-General in his latest report (A/73/898).

Of particular significance is the insidious role played by
hate speech as incitement to violence, including atrocity
crimes. Islamophobia has become the most prevalent
contemporary expression of this vile narrative. We
know only too well from our neighbourhood how the
abiding lure of communal politics has become the most
assured pathway to power. We must make concerted
efforts to reverse the tide of hate and bigotry that
threatens to undermine social cohesion and peaceful
coexistence within societies.

At its core, the responsibility to protect is not
a license to intervene in external situations, but is
instead a universal principle of non-indifference in
keeping with the historical contexts and cultural norms
of respective settings. It is predicated upon the express
recognition that the responsibility for the protection of
civilians lies first and foremost with Member States.

Set against the overarching principle of State
sovereignty, the responsibility to protect cannot become
a basis to contravene the principles of non-interference
and non-intervention, or question the national
sovereignty or territorial integrity of States. That
remains the sole point of departure for our discussion
on the responsibility to protect.