(spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this debate on the
responsibility to protect, the thematic focus of which
is the lessons learned for prevention. In that regard, we
appreciate the corresponding report of the SecretaryGeneral (А/73/898)Peru, current member of the Security Council and
the Human Rights Council, supports the consolidation
of the principle of the responsibility to protect. By
reaffirming that the responsibility falls primarily on
States, we view this formal debate as a step towards
consensus, with the recognition that such a principle is
not designed to undermine, but rather to reinforce, State
sovereignty. That means that, when national authorities
fail to protect their populations, the international
community has a responsibility, under the Charter of
the United Nations, to take measures to protect the
most vulnerable.

Peru is committed to the full enforcement of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We are a party to the fundamental
instruments in both fields and our authorities ensure
their proper implementation, including through the
continued training of our armed forces. We have also
adopted several initiatives to guarantee the proper
conduct of Peruvian troops deployed in peacekeeping
operations. However, we wish to express our deep regret
and concern at the impunity with which international
humanitarian law is violated in today’s world, in many
cases without the Security Council being up to the role
upon which it is called to fulfil.

We therefore stress that it is the obligation of the
members of the Security Council and the organized
international community to act with unity in order to
put an end to the suffering that for various reasons
affects millions of people across different regions of
the world. In that regard, we wish to emphasize that 119
States, including Peru, have signed a code of conduct
that obliges us to act promptly and decisively to prevent
and put an end to the most serious crimes. Peru also
supports the French-Mexican initiative to restrict the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. We also
take due note of the recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General’s report and propose to make
diversity a strength and not a weakness in order to
guarantee access to justice, defend the rule of law and
consolidate the guarantees of non-recurrence.

We underscore that the most effective means of
protection is through prevention. In that respect, we
wish to highlight the importance of understanding
sustainable peace as a permanent objective focused
on human beings and institutions. That, together with
full respect for fundamental freedoms, represents the
basic premise for achieving peaceful and inclusive
societies that are free of impunity. We must therefore
promote proper accountability mechanisms. In addition
to supporting the work of the International Criminal
Court, we express our support for all initiatives aimed
at ensuring that perpetrators of atrocities are held
accountable for the crimes committed. We therefore
welcome the progress made with regard to the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the prosecution of crimes in Syria; the Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant; and the
mechanism for accountability in MyanmarWe wish to conclude by reiterating Peru’s
commitment to the responsibility to protect and by
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General’s
Special Advisers for their work.