The Philippines
supported the inclusion of an agenda item on the
responsibility to protect (R2P) because we believe in
the need for a formal and continuing discussion by the
General Assembly of the still evolving concept of the
operationalization of R2PR2P affirms a State’s responsibility to protect its
population from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity perpetrated by State or
non-State actors or by its own security forces, not just
the latter. The first duty of States is the protection
of their populations from actual harm and threats to
their safety and well-being; that is the basis of State
legitimacy. But a State fails in its responsibility to
protect as much by failing to use every effective means
to protect its population from harm as by abusing it
itself. That happens when States give way to terrorism
and organized crime instead of combating them.

The Philippine Constitution values the dignity of
every person and protects the most vulnerable — women,
children and the poor, who are the easiest and most
frequent victims of mass atrocity crimes that they
cannot flee. And if they can, it is only to be turned
away at the borders of places of greater safety across the
sea. The Constitution protects the law-abiding who are
victims of the lawless, whom it is not the responsibility
of States to protect other than according them the most
basic rights of the accused after they have submitted
to the authority of the State. We must ensure that, in
identifying vulnerable populations, making a criminal
career choice does not set one apart as vulnerable to
anything but inexorable law enforcement.

Prevention is at the core of R2P. There is therefore
a need to strengthen national institutions for good
governance, especially in fighting organized crime
and terrorism, and the imperative of a strong national
defence against genocide-prone foreign State and
non-State actors. There is also a need to reform
democracy to prevent the capture of government by
violent groups such as intolerant mass movements and
forms of organized crime such as the drug tradeWe support the Secretary-General in putting
prevention at the centre of the United Nations peace
and security reform agenda. But part of prevention
is discouraging the misuse of the concept of R2P for
political purposes to justify foreign intervention in
domestic law enforcement. That discredits it and invites
the view that it is objective collusion with the evil that
the State seeks to stamp out.

The road to hell resounds with the footfalls of
the sanctimonious. Hence any application of the
R2P principle must be in strict accordance with the
parameters of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document. Any unreasonable expansion of the concept
would only undermine it and dent its credibilityWe agree with the need to strengthen early-warning
mechanisms to ensure that they lead to early actionBut early warning does not include holding back the
basic State function of stopping crime. The challenge
for R2P is to balance consistency and predictability in
the rule of law, with an appreciation of the uniqueness
of each case.

But in every case, we must acknowledge the
universality of the norms of right and wrong. These
remain opposites. While one might disagree about
what is right, let alone perfect, in all circumstances and
practical in some, there can be no doubt about what is
wrong and the necessity to fight it in every case. We
cannot accept moral relativism. We cannot accept that
there is no such thing as good and evil, but — like beauty
and ugliness being in the mind of the beholder — the
dichotomy is resolved by what is convenient for the
actor. Moral relativism is the greatest evil.

Our assessment of each possible case of failure
of the responsibility to protect must be impartial
and evidence-based, free from politics and double
standards. It excludes the selective use of the veto by
the Security Council permanent five in possible R2P
situations, in tragic revivals of colonial influenceWe also support the Secretary-General’s call
to strengthen the role of women in atrocity crimes
prevention. Women are at the forefront of our peace
processes; they are the easiest targets and victims of
conflict and the first to recognize that conflicts are
futile and an excuse for savagery.

States are encouraged to sign, ratify and implement
basic instruments of international law on this subject,
including the Rome Statute. But the commitment to
protect and advance human rights, including the right
to be safe equally from criminality and abusive State
authority, survives and far exceeds the obligation
to remain in agencies that were designed for their
enforcement but that have compromised themselves in
that task. Bonds are sacred, but institutions are merely
the people who occupy themBy 2009, the Philippines had already enacted into
law Republic Act 9851, also known as the Philippine
Act on Crimes against International Humanitarian
Law, Genocide and Other Crimes against Humanity.

It proceeds on the principle that the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community as a
whole must not go unpunished and that their effective
prosecution must be ensured by taking measures at the
national levelThe Secretary-General’s report (A/73/898) states
that today’s crises require strengthened international
cooperation and multilateral institutions. It is our view
that today’s crises equally require trust and respect for
sovereignty, not the assertion of the multilateral over
sovereign States. Now that the United Nations is under
siege from rising protectionist sentiment and hostility
to multilateralism, it becomes even more imperative to
respect the sovereign principle; one can work with it or
even around it, but never against it. That undermines
the international order, as we have seen when States are
made to fail by multilateral actionR2P is not a licence to intervene in domestic
internal affairs. Therefore, the focus of this annual
debate should be on coming up with a shared, common
understanding of the operationalization of R2P and not
jumping off from the misguided assumption that we
already have that shared, common understanding.