It is with
great pleasure that I address the General Assembly on
behalf of Portugal on this topic of the utmost importance
as a universal principle to all States.

We are fully aligned with the statement delivered
this morning by the observer of the European Union
(see A/73/PV.93), and I would like to add some remarks
in my national capacity.

Let me first thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/73/898) and praise his commitment to
advancing the responsibility to protect (R2P). Portugal
embraces the collective responsibility to support
States in implementing initiatives to reduce the risk of
atrocity crimes and to translate early warning into early
preventive action.

We also take this opportunity to reaffirm our full
support for the United Nations Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, and
welcome the appointment of Ms. Karen Smith as the
new Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on R2P.

The responsibility to protect cannot be understood
only as an international issue where the responsibility
belongs to the international community. In fact, the
primary role of prevention and protection of the
population against atrocity crimes belongs to States.

Portugal views the responsibility to protect
as a humanitarian commitment of States towards
their peoples and the international community. The
effectiveness of the principle is dependent primarily
on the political will to prevent, to raise awareness,
to promote debate and to find solutions to ongoing
atrocity crimes.

Emphasis should be placed on early prevention
action. That includes addressing socioeconomic
inequalities, promoting the rule of law, ensuring access
to education, ensuring strong democratic institutions
and the sharing of political power, addressing ethnic
mistrust and violence, implementing economic policies
focused on sustainable development and preserving
natural resources and their fair use.

The Security Council has a critical role in
enforcing the responsibility to protect in situations
where prevention has failed and the population is
already in danger. In such cases, the Security Council
has in principle a responsibility to act, including by
authorizing the use of force under Chapter VII of the

Charter of the United Nations and the relevant rules of
international humanitarian law.

However, there are no clear guidelines for such
situations. Governments have agreed to discuss the issue
on a case-by-case basis. That favours inconsistency. In
certain situations R2P is not invoked despite evidence
of atrocity crimes being committed and the Government
authorities being unwilling or unable to act. Such
inconsistency ultimately weakens the relevance of the
responsibility to protect and its tools.

One way to make the responsibility to protect more
effective would be to further explore and reinforce its
interconnection with the responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts. The responsibility to
protect their population is an obligation of States under
international law, which results from human rights
conventions and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. An act or omission of a State in the fulfilment
of those obligations is a wrongful act that entails the
State’s international responsibility with all related
legal consequences.

In our view, highlighting and enhancing the
connection between R2P and the responsibility of
States would bring more clarity and enforcement to the
responsibility of States to protect. Adopting the 2001
articles on responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts as an international convention would
certainly contribute to that goal.

The United Nations has an important role to play
in developing R2P and its tools to prevent and act in
situations where atrocity crimes are being committed.

However, we should not forget that the primary
responsibility rests with States.