Let
me start by thanking the President for convening
today’s meeting and welcoming the inclusion of the
item “The responsibility to protect and the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity” on the formal agenda of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session.

I would also like to express my delegation’s support
for the crucial work of the Secretary-General as well
as his Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Adama Dieng
and Ms. Karen Smith, respectively. I welcome their
leadership in advancing mass atrocity prevention and

mainstreaming the responsibility to protect (R2P)
within the United Nations system.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report (A/73/898) entitled “Responsibility to protect:
lessons learned for prevention”, with its ongoing
focus on prevention, following the reports from the
two previous years (A/71/1016 and A/72/884). As he
highlights in the report, atrocity crimes are preventable
when local, national, regional and international actors
make full use of the diplomatic tools that we have in a
timely and decisive manner. He also points out, however,
that there is a widening gap between the 2005 World
Summit commitment to R2P and the daily experience
of vulnerable populations. We must do more, and we
can do more.

In that context, while aligning myself with the
statement made by the representative of Denmark on
behalf of the Group of Friends of R2P (see A/73/PV.93),
I would like to highlight three points with regard to the
prevention of mass atrocity crimes, bearing in mind the
recommendations from the Secretary-General’s report.

First, ensuring accountability and ending impunity
for mass atrocity crimes is one of the most effective
ways to prevent their recurrence. States have the
primary responsibility to hold perpetrators accountable
for crimes committed within their jurisdictions. The
international community must spare no effort in
supporting national accountability efforts through
judicial cooperation and capacity-building assistance.

Furthermore, my delegation reaffirms its support for the
International Criminal Court, which plays a crucial role
in our collective efforts to end impunity for genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Secondly, we must make the most of existing
mechanisms for translating early warning into early
action if we are to succeed in narrowing the gap between
our commitments and the suffering of vulnerable
populations. We are well aware that the Security
Council has sometimes failed to live up to its special
responsibility to respond to atrocity crime risks in a
timely and decisive manner. In that regard, the Republic
of Korea, as a supporter of the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and of the political declaration on the suspension of
veto powers in cases of mass atrocity, is of the view that
the use of the veto should be limited in situations that
require immediate action to respond to mass atrocities.

We also need to make better use of the United
Nations human rights systems and strengthen the links
between the Human Rights Council and the Security
Council. The Universal Periodic Review and special
procedures can help identify possible risks early on
and facilitate action by national Governments and the
international community. Regular Security Council
briefings on mass atrocity situations by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights can help better
incorporate mass atrocity prevention into the Security
Council’s agenda.

Thirdly, we need to strengthen our comprehensive
and coordinated approach to further mainstream R2P
across the entire United Nations system and establish
greater synergy among the Organization’s three pillars.

In that connection, the Republic of Korea welcomes
the efforts of the Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect to
mainstream R2P within the United Nations system,
including through the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes. My delegation also reiterates its
support for the Human Rights Up Front initiative,
which is aimed at bringing the United Nations system
together in a mutually supportive way to strengthen
the Organization’s capacity to prevent serious human
rights violations at an early stage and sound the alarm
before abuses can escalate into mass atrocity crimes. In
addition, we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
recent initiative to launch the United Nations Strategy
and Plan of Action on Hate Speech.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
Republic of Korea’s commitment to the responsibility
to protect. I look forward to working together with
other Member States in our collective effort to protect
vulnerable people from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.