The European Union is
pleased to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.94, entitled
“Towards torture-free trade: examining the feasibility,
scope and parameters for possible common international
standards”, on behalf of the 66 members of the Global
Alliance for Torture-Free Trade and numerous other
States that are committed to seeing the international
community take collective steps forward on this issueAll States are welcome to join the AllianceThis is a timely moment for such an initiative,
falling two days after the international community
marked the International Day in Support of Victims of
Torture to honour victims and survivors throughout the
world. Today we have an opportunity to turn our words
into action.

The reason why so many States have come together
to call for greater scrutiny of this trade is simple. It is
unconscionable to turn a blind eye to the import and
export of goods that can be used to inflict torture,
suffering and even death. Permit me to cite some
examples: the spiked baton, which is a truncheon
with sharp metal spikes along part or all of its shaft;
the electric-shock belt equipped to deliver extremely
painful electric shocks, which is fixed around the
victim’s body; and the portable gas chamber, which
requires no further explanationThe international community is united in its
condemnation of torture and has on many occasions
underscored the imperative of working towards
its eradication. Put simply, torture is illegal under
international law. Some 166 States have ratified
the United Nations Convention against Torture and
have thereby pledged to take effective legislative,
administrative, judicial and other measures to prevent
acts of torture in their territory. Taking steps to address
the trade in torture goods is a critical way in which such
prevention can be assured.

The trade in goods that can only be used for torture
and other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or
punishment has been a long-standing concern at the
United Nations. Indeed, over 30 years ago, the first
Special Rapporteur on Torture, who was appointed
by the Commission on Human Rights, addressed
the issue in an early report. Subsequent Rapporteurs
have scrutinized the torture trade in more detail and
underscored the importance of controlling that trade
in order to deliver on the international community’s
commitment to eradicating torture. Several resolutions
have called for action in this field — most recently
resolution 72/163, on torture, which was adopted
by consensus on 17 December 2017. Regional
organizations, such as the African Union Commission
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe have recognized the seriousness of the torture
trade and recommended action.

In bringing forward the draft resolution under
consideration today, we have taken care to ensure
a careful step-by-step approach that avoids making
snap judgements as to how the torture trade should
be addressed. Our proposed approach is intended
first and foremost to solicit the views of all States
Members of the United Nations as to how common
international standards might be formulated in futureThe views of all Member States will form the basis
for the Secretary-General’s report that will then be
taken up for consideration by a group of governmental
experts chosen on the basis of equitable geographical
distribution. That group of experts will be charged with
reporting to the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly. This process is designed to deliver food for
thought in an efficient and transparent manner and to
support an open and constructive engagement among
the States Members of the United Nations. It does not
prejudge what further steps might then be taken by the
international community. It does not lock in further
action in New York or Geneva.

We have also sought to ensure that the negotiation
process was fair and transparent. We have held three
informal consultative meetings to garner views and
made a range of changes to the text. The text now
makes a crystal-clear demarcation between goods used
for torture and those used for the death penalty and
does not entail judgments on the death penalty. The
draft does provide that instruments used to apply the
death penalty are to be included within the purview of
the Secretary-General’s report, because certain goods
that are traded, including portable gas chambers, can
be used in ways that inflict undue suffering.

We have heard concerns from some States during
the informal consultations that the draft resolution
conflates trade and human rights concerns in an
inappropriate way — and even that we have been
motivated by protectionist instincts. We would like
to reassure those who made these points. First, the
members of the Global Alliance have a proven record
in advancing free trade and are core supporters of a
multilateral trading system. A commitment to free trade
does not mean that we should tolerate the import and
export of goods that have been specifically designed
to maim and kill. Secondly, it is by no means unusual
for the United Nations to deliberate on issues that bring
together trade and human rights considerations. The
Kimberley Process governing blood diamonds and the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights are just two examples. The text makes it
clear that the initiative does not aim at creating barriers
to international trade.

We do not claim that the draft resolution before the
General Assembly today has all the answers. Torture
can of course be inflicted with a fist or a pencil. But we
do contend that turning a blind eye to the torture trade
can only empower those who resort to torture and can
only help to legitimize an illegal international practiceWe call on all members of the General Assembly to
support the adoption of draft resolution A/73/L.94
today and to join us in adopting this initiative designed
to boost the collective global fight against tortureThe Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/73/L.94We think this is an important step on which we can
build further work with regard to establishing common
international standards for torture-free trade..

Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seatsWe thank all colleagues for
voting in favour of this new step towards torture-free
trade. Resolution 73/304 is about encouraging reflection,
debate and the sharing of perspectives and experiencesIt was drafted in a balanced and transparent manner.

Romania aligns itself
with the statements delivered by the observer of the
European Union and by the representative of Denmark
on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Responsibility
to ProtectRomania commends the inclusion of the subject of
today’s debate, on the responsibility to protect (R2P),
in the formal agenda of the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly, as my country was one of the nine
Member States that made this requestWe welcome the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsibility to protect (A/73/898) and
its focus on lessons learned for prevention, as we believe
that the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity is fundamental
for the peace and stability of our world. We welcome
also the recommendations made by the SecretaryGeneral and the measures proposed to be taken both at
the national and international levels in order to advance
this agenda.

In our national capacity, we are determined
to work for the prevention of international crimes,
and in this respect my country has taken several
measures. We appointed a national contact point
from the Romanian Public Ministry to the European
network for investigation and prosecution of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. In 2005, we
established the Elie Wiesel National Institute for the
Study of the Holocaust in Romania, and in 2018 the
Network for Genocide Prevention and Multidisciplinary
Research into Mass Graves, aimed at building the
capacity to prevent and investigate genocide. Romania
is also an active member of the International Holocaust
Remembrance Alliance, including in the area of the
prevention of genocide.

My country ratified the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and has enacted national legislation in accordance with
its provisions. Romania disseminates knowledge about
the principles of the Convention, including judicial
training through courses on public international law
and through seminars for justice professionals. The
Romanian Public Ministry, in cooperation with the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and other Government
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations,
organizes training for judges and State officials
involved in criminal investigations on topics pertaining
to the Holocaust, genocide prevention and mass
grave investigationsIn 2015, Romania submitted its unilateral
declaration accepting the compulsory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, as part of our
commitment to international law and in recognition of
the prominent contribution of the Court to international
peace. We encourage others to consider taking action
in support of the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations.

We share the Secretary-General’s focus on
the importance of early action when it comes to
responsibility to protect. Romania is fully committed
to the protection of civilians, supports humanitarian
action and has joined several international initiatives
aimed at protecting the population, especially
vulnerable groups, such as children. We are also
engaged with police officers and military personnel in
ensuring that peacekeeping missions have a protection
of civilians mandateMy country believes that regional organizations
have to play a key role in preventing and responding to
mass atrocities, as they can assess the situation on the
ground and the regional context at first hand. That was
stressed during the ninth annual meeting of the Global
Network of R2P Focal Points, which took place in MayIn conclusion, I would like to add my voice to
those who showed support today for the principle of
the responsibility to protect and acknowledged the
importance of developing preventive capacities. Allow
me to also express my appreciation for the activities
of the Global Centre for R2P, both as secretariat of the
Global Network of R2P Focal Points and as a United
Nations partner in promoting R2P globally.