(spoke
in Russian): We welcome the General Assembly’s
decision to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the convening of the International Conference
on Population and Development. We consider the
Programme of Action adopted at the Conference to be
a fundamental document for international cooperation
in population and development that should not be
amended or edited. We are of the view that the work of
the bodies and agencies of the United Nations system in
this area should be based on the basic principles of the
Programme of Action that were agreed on 25 years ago,
and not on their arbitrary interpretation.

In that context, our delegation supported resolution
73/303, which was just adopted, in order to strengthen
the principle of consensus, although not all the
resolution’s provisions fully take our approaches into
account. We are guided by the fact that the text that
was adopted does not set a precedent for the holding
of such events with respect to the participation of
non-governmental organizations in the meeting. We
also expect that all States will have the opportunity to
speak in the upcoming meeting, if they are interested in
doing so, and that their statements will be given priority.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the vote.

The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.

Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/73/L.94)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.94.

(spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to take this
opportunity to thank the delegation of Afghanistan
for its initiative to prepare resolution 73/305, entitled

“Enhancement of international cooperation to assist
victims of terrorism”.

appropriate system of assistance and protection that
meets their genuine needs.

We are pleased to note that the result of such efforts
was a consensus document that will be an important
addition to the broad range of measures to combat
terrorism under the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We would like to stress in particular
the importance of the resolution’s provisions concerning
access for victims to the justice system and respect for
their rights in legal cases, as well as the paragraphs
pertaining to the improvement of criminal measures
to punish terrorists and to cooperation between the
relevant entities tasked with that role.

The Group of Friends of the Victims of Terrorism
was formed just this week. We, along with Afghanistan,
will chair the Group. We hope to be able to work to
promote the agenda of the victims of terrorism here
at the United Nations. Furthermore, Under-SecretaryGeneral Vladimir Voronkov recently announced a
global conference that will bring together the victims of
terrorism in June next year. We appreciate that initiative,
view it as a positive sign and will participate fully.

However, due to the thematic scope of resolution
73/305, some fundamental aspects had to be omitted. In
its implementation, there is the need to consider that the
imperative of combating terrorism should be punishing
those participating in terrorist activities. Therefore,
we call on all States to honour their international
commitments and assume their responsibilities in
accordance with the principle of aut dedere aut
judicare, outlined in the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. It is also important to improve the mutual
legal assistance and extradition mechanisms, thereby
bolstering cooperation among the bodies tasked with
those issues.

We believe that political will to cooperate on
law enforcement is one of the most crucial factors in
decreasing the number of terrorist acts and in ensuring
the legal rights of the victims of such crimes.

The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.

We will now hear statements after the adoption of
resolution 73/305.

(spoke in
Russian): I will begin my statement in a less than
traditional way, with some words of regret. We regret
the fact that, for the second year in a row, debates on this
issue have been moved to the General Assembly through
a vote. The interactive dialogue format that prevailed
prior to 2018 has been relegated to the past, and with it
opportunities to discuss and reconcile positions. There
was a time when the older United Nations elites would
say that if you want to make an idea boring, drown it in

the routine of national statements; if you want to kill an
idea, refuse all compromise and put it to a vote. We see
a similar situation here with the unfortunate concept of
the responsibility to protect (R2P).

We note the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/73/898) on this topic. Like previous
reports, we view it strictly through the lens of the
relevant chapter of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document. We share the general view on the need to
prevent genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity, which runs throughout the
Secretary-General’s report. That is the right idea. It
was first proposed by States in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document. However, over time the idea has
been interpreted in too many different ways. Today the
substance of the concept of R2P has been degraded.

We regret the fact that the Secretary-General’s report
does not reflect the full spectrum of approaches taken.

We are guided by the fact that reports must include a
description of the current status of discussions on the
concept, a list of all perspectives and, crucially, all
contentious elements on which States must agree.

I had planned to end my statement here, but I am
unable to do so. Just before I spoke, the representative of
Ukraine took the floor and again levelled accusations at
my country, with his hackneyed theories of occupation,
aggression and other crimes and mortal sins. It must be
understood that this is a country that includes among
the ranks of its national heroes Nazi cronies such as and
Roman Shukhevych and Stepan Bandera; where every
year a torch-bearing ceremony is held similar to the
one in Nazi Germany in 1939; and where soldiers draw
swastikas on their helmets. It is a country whose former
President took photographs of himself with his soldiers
in the background bearing symbols of Schutzstaffel
squadrons. It is country that burned its own citizens
and, during a talk show, those events were applauded by
Ukrainians in an auditorium. As such, this country has
no right to level accusations at the Russian Federation.

Regrettably, Ukraine now needs at least three things:
denazification, demilitarization and democratization. It
needs real democratization, and not just colourful gay
parades in the central squares of Kyiv.