Slovenia strongly
welcomes today’s General Assembly formal debate
on the responsibility to protect (R2P). We would like
to thank the Secretary-General for this year’s report,
entitled “Responsibility to protect: lessons learned for
prevention” (A/73/898). We once again welcome the
inclusion of R2P and the prevention of genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
on the formal agenda of the General Assembly at
its seventy-third session and express our support
for its inclusion as a standing agenda item of the
General Assembly.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statements delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union (EU)
and by the representative of Denmark on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

No matter how many times we reiterate that the
failure to protect human beings from mass atrocities
and systemic violations of human rights should not be
repeated, we still witness events that shock our human
conscience time and again. It is important that today’s
dialogue is taking place and that the dialogue should
continue on a regular basis. The different views, many
of which we will hear in the Hall today, must not inhibit
our joint determination and commitment to protecting

populations from atrocity crimes in the future. It
is important that we also scale up our efforts at the
national and regional levels.

We fully support the use of preventive diplomacy
and we call for prevention and a better response to
large-scale violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Slovenia believes that prevention
remains the key to protecting populations from
situations that may lead to mass atrocity crimes.

At the national level, we are therefore organizing
awareness-raising events on R2P, using the United
Nations Framework of Analysis for Atrocity
Crimes, which we have translated into the Slovenian
language. For a number of years Slovenia has also
been organizing biannual regional R2P focal point
meetings and academic conferences on R2P. Following
the 2013, 2015 and 2017 events, Slovenia hosted the
fourth academic conference entitled “Responsibility to
Protect in Theory and Practice” in May. We would like
to especially thank Special Adviser Ms. Karen Smith
for her contribution at the conference.

The Slovenian R2P focal point joined the steering
group for R2P in 2019 with the objective of mobilizing
the effective implementation of R2P through the Global
Network of the Responsibility to Protect Focal Points.

Let me use this opportunity to reiterate the call to all
Member States and partners that have not yet appointed
their national R2P focal point to do so.

At the regional level, we support the EU-level
activities and, in that respect, we are especially proud
of the document entitled “Recommendations on
promoting and operationalizing the Responsibility to
Protect by the EU and EU member States” and the EU
R2P Mass Atrocity Prevention Toolkit. We are also
very pleased that other regional organizations were
invited to the Meeting of the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points held in Brussels in May.

We believe that the Security Council can have a
decisive role in preventing and addressing situations
of mass atrocity. Slovenia supports the idea of better
utilizing the Security Council to more efficiently
address human rights violations as threats and early
indicators of atrocity crimes. We encourage the Council
to invite Special Advisers to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect and other experts on a regular basis for
briefings, especially regarding early warning.

Geneva-based institutions such as the Human
Rights Council and its mechanisms, for example, the
Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
mandate holders, can play an important role in
increasing early awareness and early-action efforts.

Regular Security Council briefings by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as by chairs
of fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry,
can further strengthen the necessary cooperation to
prevent mass atrocities.

In order to improve the international community’s
ability to take timely and decisive early action, we
strongly support the code of conduct developed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group
and the French-Mexican initiative, which calls on
the permanent members of the Security Council to
voluntarily refrain from using the veto in situations of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Slovenia wishes to reiterate that no effort should
be spared to systematically invest in the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Ensuring accountability for atrocity
crimes and other serious abuses of human rights
and international humanitarian law is and remains
an important aspect of preventing the recurrence
of conflict.

But ensuring accountability remains a major
challenge. In this regard, the role of international
criminal justice has been recognized, in particular
the role of the International Criminal Court. We
continue to express our firm support for the work of the
International Criminal Court as well as of regional and
State mechanisms to counter impunity.

The Rome Statute offers an important legal
framework for national legal systems and acts as
a deterrent to the most heinous crimes. Individual
criminal accountability is a crucial element for breaking
the vicious circle of impunity. Slovenia will continue to
advocate for the universality of the Rome Statute.

In a broader framework, Slovenia believes that
numerous activities, including efforts to ensure the full
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and preventive measures such as the
World Programme for Human Rights Education, can
contribute to atrocity prevention and respect for human
rights and the rule of law. Here let me reaffirm our
support for the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up
Front initiative.

It is up to us, the Member States, to get prevention
right, to be aware of and recognize early-warning
signs such as human rights violations, and to respond
appropriately. We hold the primary responsibility to
protect our populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Once again, let me reaffirm Slovenia’s support for
the United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and
the Responsibility to Protect and the committed work
of Special Advisers Mr. Adama Dieng and Ms. Karen
Smith to mainstream the responsibility to protect
within the United Nations system. We also thank the
Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect for its
efforts and support in the area of awareness-raising.

As we will be celebrating the fifteenth anniversary
of R2P next year and taking stock of the efforts made to
implement it, we would welcome a General Assembly
resolution in this respect.

Let me conclude by stating Slovenia’s strong
commitment to remain an advocate of R2P and of the
wider promotion and protection of human rights.