(spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union and with the statement
delivered by the representative of Denmark on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/73/898). We agree with his
approach, which is focused on prevention and on
national measures aimed at addressing the risk of
atrocity crimes.

Spain is in favour of making today’s debate part
of the agenda of the General Assembly on a regular
basis every year. No society is immune to the risk of
atrocity crimes. That is why no society should lower
its guard. We are concerned about the increase in
extremist political positions in many parts of the world,
including in Europe, the region to which we belong.

Those are positions that are strengthened and fuelled by
xenophobic and racist discourse — fallacious denials of
the equality of all people and of the humanity in each
of us. Given that phenomenon, we must vigorously
and persistently defend the dignity and equality of
all individuals. With that concern in mind, we again
warmly welcome the United Nations Strategy and Plan
of Action on Hate Speech, which was presented on
18 June.

Spain believes that the responsibility to protect
should have an approach that respects human rights
and international humanitarian law, above all through
concerted action by the international community.

Valuable examples of that, in our opinion, are the
Global Compact on Refugees and the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, both of which
offer a framework for cooperative and valid action that
is beneficial because of its preventive potential.

Prevention is always more effective when it is part
of a joint, multidisciplinary and cross-cutting approach
that favours the synergy of different agendas. That
conviction informs our commitment to bringing the
responsibility to protect to the women and peace and
security agenda, in line with what has already been
included in the report of the Secretary-General. In
our view, it is also necessary for that synergy to lead
to a systematic consideration of the responsibility to
protect in the work of the Security Council and in the
monitoring of specific situations.

In that connection, we welcome the joint statement
on attacks against civilians in central Mali issued by the
Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the
Responsibility to Protect and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. Spain is therefore in favour of those Special
Advisers and Special Representatives being heard

when the Security Council discusses measures to be
taken in situations of this nature, including in closeddoor consultations.

Atrocity crimes cannot go unpunished, and those
responsible must be brought to justice. There is no doubt
that each State has the responsibility and competence to
investigate and prosecute atrocity crimes. But let us not
forget that international cooperation among States in
that regard often facilitates, and sometimes even makes
it possible, for States to exercise that responsibility
and competence. However, that does not obviate the
existence of, and support for, the International Criminal
Court and complementary mechanisms and measures,
such as the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission. Spain firmly believes that mechanisms
for investigating and verifying facts have an invaluable
preventive role. In addition, those mechanisms
perfectly match the subsequent demand for criminal
responsibility for the gravest violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that, in
our opinion, this is not merely a conceptual debate
about procedure or competence. States always have
the responsibility to protect their populations and
have no justification for dodging that responsibility
or exonerating those responsible. It is a responsibility
that must be enforced by all means at our disposal, and
does not affect the need to further explore preventive
measures under the three equal, complementary and
non-sequential pillars of the responsibility to protect..

(spoke in Spanish):
We are pleased to be here for the adoption by consensus
of resolution 73/305, on enhancing international
cooperation to assist victims of terrorism.

First of all, we would like to thank Afghanistan
for this initiative and for the efforts it made in recent
years in support of victims. For years, Spain has called
for the primacy of the role of victims in combating
terrorism and stressed the ethical and moral need to
fully recognize them and their rights and to build an

The resolution just adopted calls upon Member
States to develop comprehensive assistance plans for
the victims of terrorism that address their immediate
and short- and long-term needs. Resolution 73/305
also encourages States to share good practices in that
area. Spain, which has an advanced and comprehensive
system to protect and recognize the victims of terrorism,
would like to demonstrate its readiness to share its
experience within the framework of the resolution.

We know that several victims of terrorism
throughout the world still lack the protection and
recognition they deserve. We intend to continue
working to change that situation. With the adoption
of resolution 73/305, on which we again congratulate
Afghanistan, we are optimistic and hopeful that we are
finally moving in the right direction.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item. The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 74.

Agenda item 168 (continued)
The responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/898)