(spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation took note of the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/73/898. We support in principle some of the report’s
content about the primary responsibility of States to
protect their citizens and the role and responsibility
of the United Nations, as a collective organization, to
bolster the early-warning systems aimed at preventing
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

With regard to today’s meeting, my delegation,
supported by a significant number of Member States,
still rejects this exclusionary and unprofessional
approach in convening such a meeting, repeatedly
called for by certain States in order to exploit and
politicize the concept of the responsibility to protect
(R2P). That exacerbates the dispute in the General
Assembly regarding humanitarian issues, which are
both noble and just.

Everyone in this Hall knows that the world in which
we live today is far from ideal and that the United
Nations is going through a critical but crucial phase in
its work and performance. That is due to the significant
phenomenon of political and financial polarization.

At the same time, everyone knows the catastrophic
consequences and the war crimes perpetrated by the
Governments of certain Member States as a result of
individually misusing the concept of R2P without a
United Nations mandate in order to implement their
own foreign policies, leading to aggression and military
invasion outside international legitimacy.

From this rostrum, we will continue to remind
all Member States that, in one of his reports on R2P,
the Secretary-General explicitly recognized the
serious concerns arising from the misuse by certain
Governments of the concept of R2P in Libya, which is
a country rich in resources and people. That country is
now tragically living in a state of destruction, chaos,
political disputes, bloody conflict and the spread of
terrorism due to the military operations and air strikes
of the armies of certain Governments that claim to
be protecting civilians in Libya. In fact, they are
destroying Libya and its capabilities and resources
while fragmenting its people and undermining its
national political unity.

However, the great disaster today is that the
same Governments, which have sent their military
planes, fleets and destroyers to Libya, Iraq, Syria and

other States throughout the world, are determined to
repeatedly commit the same war crimes in other regions
of the world under the same pretext of exercising R2P
and bolstering democracy and human rights, as they say.

Every time we debate these issues, representatives of
the Governments that have long carried out occupation
and committed aggression reiterate the same sentence
again and again, namely, that the pretext of national
sovereignty of certain States will not prevent these
Governments from protecting the peoples of those
States against violations of human rights. We ask the
representatives of these Governments what logic would
make us accept their exploitation of the concept of R2P
as a pretext to wage aggression against Member States,
killing tens of thousands of civilians, destroying the
capabilities of States, displacing millions of people
and drowning thousands of them in the seas, while
disseminating terrorism throughout the world and
creating and expanding the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. It is an important question addressed
to all Member States.

When we simply read some of the details of the
recent Secretary-General’s report on the concept of
R2P, we certainly see that there is a suspicious trend to
promote the three artificial pillars of the concept of R2P,
in particular the third pillar, which is always exploited in
order to carry out military aggression and wars against
many States in the world. Even worse is the fact that the
authors of the report are determined to ignore the lack
of significant agreement among Member States on the
parameters and guarantees in implementing R2P. They
are also determined to ignore the practical concerns
over a lack of assurances and constraints that would
ensure the non-recurrence of exploiting the concept of
R2P as a pretext to undermine the sovereignty of States
and interfere in their domestic affairs.

We in the Syrian Arab Republic resolutely respect
the Charter of the United Nations and, as the English
saying goes, we go by the book. The book is the
Charter, which contains binding provisions for all
Member States. The Charter is the one and only book.

That is why we say that we go by the book. We will also
continue to refuse the politicization of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document.

In that context, we emphasize once again that
those responsible for the widely differing views of
Member States on R2P that we are seeing today are the
Governments that are working, together with certain

Secretariat personnel, to establish the erroneous pillars
and legal basis for R2P.

The majority of Member States are totally
convinced that paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome document do not recognize
R2P as a principle. Rather, they have emphasized
the established, fundamental and genuine principles
contained in the Charter of the United Nations and
linked to the maintenance of international peace and
security; saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war; recognizing the fundamental human
rights and the dignity of the human person; and
promoting social progress and better standards of life
in larger freedom while respecting the sovereignty of
States and non-interference in their internal affairs.

Some want to go back to the time of League
of Nations, to legalize the concepts of mandate,
trusteeship, occupation and colonization. That is the
main difference between the League of Nations and the
United Nations. The United Nations has put an end to
the historic mistake represented by the undertakings of
the League of Nations, which legitimized occupation
and war. That is why the League of Nations failed and
the United Nations was created to put an end to that
historic mistake pertaining to the performance and
conduct of the League.

My country, Syria, along with other significant
number of Member States, continues to reject this
exclusionary approach and to oppose the inclusion of
the R2P item on the agenda of the General Assembly,
especially since the informal consultations held have
not yet overcome the core differences between Member
States or moved towards engaging positively in
discussing the real concerns related to this issue.

The Syrian Arab Republic, as a founding Member
of the Organization, is determined to remain faithful
to the Charter and to not give in to practices of
intimidation and polarization at any cost. That is
why the crisis in my country has continued for eight
years now. For eight years we have rejected policies of
polarization, extortion and intimidation. Based on that,
we will keep opposing those who promote controversial
issues, and we call upon all Members to admit that
the United Nations remains unable to shoulder its
serious responsibility of protecting the Syrian and
Palestinian peoples from the Israeli occupation and
its supporters; that the United Nations is unable to
activate an early-warning system to protect the Syrians

and the Iraqis from the acts of terrorism perpetrated
by Da’esh, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations; that the United Nations has
also failed in activating an international early-warning
and cooperation system to combat the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, which involves Governments
and intelligence services; and that the United Nations
is unable to exercise the R2P or to address the crimes
that are being committed by the illicit international
coalition, led by the United States, against the Syrian
people. Those crimes have led, according to United
Nations reports, to the total destruction of the city of
Raqqa and the semi-destruction of the ancient city
of Palmyra, the killing of thousands of civilians in
Syria and the destruction of infrastructure, bridges
and electrical and water plants under the pretext of
combating terrorism. The destruction of monuments has
become part of combating terrorism. The destruction of
States Members of the Organization has become part
of combating terrorism. The total destruction of cities
has become part of combating terrorism. The critical
question is: What terrorism are they speaking about? Is
it the terrorism that they themselves created?
When the Secretariat and the Governments of
certain Member States recognize that these issues
reflect the failure of the United Nations to respect
and implement the purposes and principles of the
Charter, then and only then will Syria and many other
Member States that cherish, in words and in deeds, the
principles of freedom, justice and equality be prepared
to transparently debate R2P, so as to reach a consensus
on the parameters of the concept and guarantees on
its non-use for political objectives that run counter to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations and
its Charter.

In conclusion, we call on Members, with great
positivity and openness, to return to the format of
informal consultations on this issue, as that is the
only practical way forward where we can express our
concerns and reach the desired consensus. Let us all
remember that our duty as Member States is to support
the status and capability of the United Nations so that
it can remain the collective platform that allows us to
debate our serious disputes and concerns related to
controversial and sensitive concepts and principles
that can have a negative impact on the future and the
horizons of the Organization, which must remain the
only international umbrella under which we gather.

All Members know that certain Governments are
exploiting this situation so as to not commit themselves
to the mandate of the competent organ of the United
Nations responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, namely, the Security Council.

Their aim is to carry out personal, selfish political
and military practices that run counter to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, practices that which
eventually threaten international peace and security..

(spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like
to express its deep thanks and appreciation to the
representatives of the permanent delegation of the
friendly Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the
transparent and balanced process they carried out
successfully and in a professional manner, which led to
today’s draft resolution A/73/L.88.

My country, Syria, will join the consensus on the
draft resolution. We participated in the negotiations
and consultations in a most positive and constructive

spirit. We wanted a draft resolution that, as much
as possible, would achieve the noble objectives of
promoting international cooperation to assist the
victims of terrorism.

However, the path to achieving such important
objectives is often routinely blocked by obstacles
resulting from political considerations that are related
to the interests of States or regional and geographic
groups. In that regard, my delegation would like to
explain its firm position with regard to the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.

We shall continue to call for the reform of the
Centre’s system and its working methods in order
to ensure the implementation of the principles of
transparency, participation and governance. At the
same time, the Syrian Arab Republic will continue
to disassociate itself from the activities of the Centre
because we believe that it works in a way that runs
counter to the United Nations principles of transparency,
neutrality and inclusiveness.

With regard to the substance of the draft resolution,
as a country that is primarily concerned with combating
terrorism, the Syrian Arab Republic welcomes any
references to protecting the rights of the victims of
crimes perpetrated by armed terrorist groups, which
primarily target civilians, leading to the killing of
thousands and the injury of thousands more on pretexts
that have no basis in fact or reality. Such acts also target
public and private property and infrastructure, leading
to the displacement of millions and threatening the
stability of States and societies, as well as the security
of their citizens.

In parallel, my delegation stresses that the
prosecution and ensuring of accountability for the
perpetrators of terrorist acts and crimes must take
place within a national framework that respects
national ownership and characteristics, as well as the
laws and Constitutions of States, through national
legal institutions.

The Syrian Arab Republic therefore welcomes the
reference in the draft resolution in that respect. We also
stress that sharing information and expertise among
Member States must be based on the principle of mutual
respect for national sovereignty and that providing
United Nations technical assistance to Member States
must be based on requests from the Governments
of States.

In its war against terrorism against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and
other terrorist groups, the Syrian Arab Republic has lost
tens of thousands of its sons and daughters. The Syrian
people have experienced unprecedented suffering
because of terrorism, in addition to terrible economic
losses that no State in the world can bear alone.

However, to date my country has received no
technical or concrete financial support from the United
Nations in combating terrorism. In fact, it is subject
to an unprecedented economic siege, imposed by the
Governments of States that have either participated in
financing that terrorism or have turned a blind eye to it
and its supporters and financers.

We still believe that there are many international
responsibilities towards the victims of terrorism in
Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and any other parts of
the world that face terrorism. Those responsibilities
should be borne by Member States and the United
Nations in a collective manner. They are fundamentally
linked to the need to implement the relevant Security
Council counter-terrorism resolutions so as to
eradicate terrorism as a very dangerous international
phenomenon that threatens international peace and
security and leads to countless victims. We now bear
the responsibility for compensating and rehabilitating
those victims.

Let me say very frankly that we are here today to
deal with the consequences of terrorist acts because
some Governments did not commit to combating
terrorism in a non-politicized way without double
standards — States that did not respect the Security
Council resolutions adopted under Chapter VII, which
prohibit and criminalize the financing and arming
of supporters of armed terrorist groups. They have
breached those resolutions and have participated
directly in the spread of the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.

Let me conclude by stressing that my country, Syria,
joins the consensus on the draft resolution and supports
all international efforts that respect the national
sovereignty of States, since national Governments are
the true partner in combating terrorism and in protecting
the rights of victims of terrorism. However, we will
always emphasize that we owe the victims of terrorism
everywhere on Earth a large debt and that the protection
of the rights of victims of terrorism starts with dealing

with the real root causes and grounds that led to the
spread of terrorism as an international phenomenon.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.88, entitled “Enhancement of
international cooperation to assist victims of terrorism”.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.88, and in addition to those delegations
listed therein, the following countries have become
co-sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Algeria,
Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Kenya, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway,
Panama, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, the United Kingdom, the United States
of America, Uzbekistan and Yemen.

The Acting President: May I take I that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.88?
Draft resolution A/73/L.88
(resolution 73/305).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.