2nd

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Intersessional seminar on the contribution of the Human Rights
Council to the prevention of human rights violations

8 October 2019
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group
of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect. We would like to thank the Chairrapporteur and all the panellists for their remarks.

The Group of Friends of R2P has continuously emphasized that widespread
and systematic violations of human rights can serve as early warning signs of
potential genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and/or crimes against
humanity. The prevention of such violations, including through
accountability, is crucial to ensure prevention of their potential escalation into
atrocity crimes.

In this regard, we welcome today’s discussion on the cooperation between the
Human Rights Council and the pillars of the United Nations system on the
prevention of human rights violations with the view to sustaining peace and
implementing sustainable development.

The relationship between human rights and development, including the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, is mutually reinforcing and
complementary. Without addressing human rights violations and abuses
persistent in many places around the world, progress in sustainable
development will be impeded. It is therefore crucial to recognize that the
pursuit of good governance, legitimate and accountable domestic institutions
and the rule of law are not only key for sustainable development, but further
constitute pre-requisites for societies which are resilient to discrimination,
radicalisation and other warning signs which, if not addressed, could lead to
atrocities.

We therefore call upon the HRC, within its mandate, to deepen its engagement
with development stakeholders, including international and regional
mechanisms, national institutions and civil society, to better embed and
integrate its work, in particular those focusing on technical assistance and
capacity building, in frameworks focusing on the implementation of the SDGs.

In this regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s prioritisation of a
systematic integration of human rights into the work of Resident Coordinators
and UN country teams.

We further recognize the linkages between the peace and security agenda and
the work of the HRC. Placing human rights at the centre of conflict and
atrocity agendas is essential for effective prevention, and requires systematic
cooperation between the Human Rights Council, within its mandate, and
other relevant UN mechanisms. We encourage all pillars of the UN system to
consider and make use of the vast information that Geneva-based UN human

rights mechanisms provide, including the work carried out by independent
investigative mechanisms mandated by the HRC. In addition, we also
encourage greater exchange and interaction between the HRC and the Third
Committee in order to further enhance consistency and coherence. Lastly, we
also encourage the UN Joint Office on the Prevention of Genocide and the
Responsibility to Protect to provide regular briefings to member states in both
Geneva and New York.

Madame Chair,
We recognize the crucial role that Geneva-based human rights mechanisms
play to bridge the gap between human rights and the development and peace
and security agenda and vice versa. However, in your opinion, how can UN
development and peace and security mechanisms in New York and elsewhere
better collaborate with Geneva-based human rights institutions?
Thank you.

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the
High Commissioner and the Secretary-General
10 September 2019
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect (R2P).

We would like to thank the High Commissioner Madame Bachelet and her Office for their tireless
endeavours in preventing the continuation of human rights violations, engaging with all
Governments in order to secure respect for all human rights and enhancing international
cooperation to protect human rights including through monitoring and reporting of gross human
rights violations and abuses around the world, in accordance with their mandates. We further
thank her for the oral update to the Council.

The work carried out by the High Commissioner, the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms
is vital to fulfilling the Responsibility to Protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing. Geneva-based human rights mechanisms play a
fundamental role in upholding our individual and shared commitment to mass atrocity
prevention.

Mr. President,
The High Commissioner’s reports and regular updates on country specific situations are
particularly relevant in supporting international eff orts to address the risks of mass atrocity
crimes, since they help raise awareness and are capable of mobilizing effective preventive and
responsive action at an early stage. Further, OHCHR plays a crucial role in addressing factors
which facilitate systematic human rights violations and can, through the wider Geneva-system,
contribute to subsequent efforts of technical assistance and capacity building aimed at
strengthening domestic atrocity prevention.

Furthermore, we highlight the importance of special procedures mandate holders, the Universal
Periodic Review and other mechanisms under the auspices of the Human Rights Council in the
context of assisting States to fulfil their international obligations. States also have an individual
responsibility to protect their populations from mass atrocities and, where unable or unwilling to
do so, the responsibility lies with the international community to act through the United Nations.

Lastly, we would like to highlight the importance of strengthening coordination and streamlining
the United Nations system in the field of human rights to more effectively prevent gross human
rights violations.

Mr. President,
It is clear that the key to effective action in preventing mass atrocity crimes is through raising
awareness of situations at risk. We therefore urge the High Commissioner to continue to shed
light on systematic human rights violations and therefore mobilize support to take action.

Towards this end, we call upon the international community better utilize this knowledge in order
to act in a timely and decisive manner when early warning signs of possible atrocity situations
emerge.

STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF

The Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect
DELIVERED BY

His Excellency Ambassador Martin
Bille Hermann
Permanent Representative of Denmark to
the United Nations
DURING

The Formal Debate of the UN General
Assembly
UN Headquarters - New York 27 June 2019

Mr. President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of 51 Member
States and the European Union, and this year co-chaired by Denmark
and Qatar.

Today marks the third UN General Assembly formal debate on the
Responsibility to Protect. We welcome the UN member’s support for
the inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda, over the past two years. It
also reflects the strong interest of the members to share ideas and
best practices about how we can collectively improve our ability to
prevent genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing. We believe the General Assembly should continue this
practice of open and frank debate – a practice repeatedly
recommended by the Secretary-General.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility
to Protect takes stock of past practice and includes lessons learned for
prevention.

The

recommendations

Group
for

welcomes

implementing

the
and

Secretary-General’s
integrating

the

responsibility to protect as an important part of his broader strategy
to prioritize prevention across all pillars of the UN’s work. We
appreciate his sustained commitment to the implementation of the
Human Rights Up Front initiative, thereby strengthening the UN
system’s ability to prevent the most serious human rights violations
from happening, including those that possibly lead to the commission
of atrocities. The Group commends the Secretary-General and his
Special Advisers on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to
Protect for their leadership in advancing mass atrocity prevention. As

this is the first time Ms. Smith joins us in the General Assembly as the
Special Adviser on R2P, we especially would like to welcome her.

Since 2005, considerable progress has been achieved by the UN,
Member States and other stakeholders, including civil society, in
advancing atrocity prevention at the national, regional and
international levels. International and domestic actors have
successfully created frameworks to identify triggers and risks,
develop

indicators

and

early

warning

mechanisms,

and

institutionalize prevention mechanisms and partnerships. As a
Group of Friends, we have also worked towards conceptually linking
R2P, where appropriate, to other related agendas, including
Peacekeeping; the Protection of Civilians; Women, Peace and
Security; Sustaining Peace; and the Sustainable Development Goals.

Today’s formal debate provides States with an important opportunity
to share experiences, best practices, and effective strategies for
preventing atrocities. In this context, it is worth highlighting that
almost a third of all UN Member States have appointed a national
R2P Focal Point and joined the Global Network of R2P Focal Points
– the largest governmental network dedicated to preventing mass
atrocities.

Currently we are witnessing a divided Security Council unable to take
timely and decisive action in multiple atrocity situations. At the same
time, the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council can play
an important role in responding to atrocity crimes, as demonstrated
by the establishment of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for crimes committed in Syria. This success is a direct
result of concerted efforts by Member States committed to holding

those responsible for atrocities accountable for their actions. We
recognize that the primary responsibility to protect lies with Member
States, but should peaceful means be inadequate and national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations the
international community should be prepared to take collective action,
in a timely and decisive manner, through the Security Council.

We also commend the initiatives of Member States to bring
perpetrators of atrocity crimes to justice. Such crimes include war
crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide, as reflected in the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.

Domestic

accountability measures for atrocities are among the most effective
ways to prevent recurrence. States have the primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute genocide, torture, and other such crimes
committed within their jurisdiction and national accountability
efforts should be encouraged and supported, including through the
strengthening of judicial cooperation between States. Fact-finding
missions, investigative mechanisms, commissions of inquiry, hybrid
and international courts and tribunals provide complementary
avenues to enable accountability when and where options under
domestic law prove insufficient.

Mr. President,
While accountability is important to prevent recurrence, our ultimate
objective is to prevent atrocity crimes from occurring in the first
place. Prevention is at the core of each of the three pillars of R2P, and
Member States should identify complementary agendas where UN
efforts can assist in preventing atrocities. For example, the
interaction between the Human Rights Council and the Security

Council could be strengthened to better inform the latter about
situations that may lead to atrocity crimes. Measures taken by States
to prevent atrocity crimes can also contribute to national and regional
peace and stability and reinforce national sovereignty.

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides a
framework for global cooperation to achieve a better and more
sustainable future – and can significantly contribute to atrocity
prevention efforts. Eradicating poverty, providing development
assistance, and supporting capacity and institution building can
address grievances and instability that may drive the perpetration of
atrocity crimes.

No country or region is immune to the risk factors for atrocity crimes.

We are increasingly concerned about the rising levels of incitement
to discrimination, hostility and violence in all its forms, as well as hate
speech and xenophobia, in many parts of the world. As SecretaryGeneral Antonio Guterres has said, “Hatred is a threat to everyone –
and so this is a job for everyone.”
We also strongly support an inclusive approach to preventing
atrocity crimes — one that recognizes the critical role women play in
early warning, promoting peacebuilding, peacekeeping, capacity
building, and more cohesive, inclusive and resilient societies. We
should take concrete steps to end all forms of gender-based
discrimination and violence and to empower women as agents of
change, including by ensuring all women have access to quality
education and to meaningfully participate in the decision-making
processes affecting their lives. We recognize the important role
national and international civil society organizations play in

supporting the advancement and implementation of R2P. In
particular, we would like to thank the Global Centre for the
Responsibility to Protect for its invaluable work as the Secretariat of
the Group of Friends, both in New York and Geneva.

Mr. President,
According to the UN Refugee Agency, the number of forcibly
displaced people as a result of persecution, conflict and atrocities is
at its highest level since the end of the Second World War – 70.8
million in 2018, and this number continues to increase. This figure
demonstrates why upholding the responsibility to protect needs to be
at the heart of our shared mission to advance peace and security.

Today, during this Formal Debate, we look forward to hearing from
Member States on best practices to end the current climate of
impunity and inaction with regard to the heightening risk of atrocity
crimes across the globe. Let this debate be a reminder of the
importance to continue this exchange of information and the need to
strengthen

our

individual

and

collective

prevention

and

accountability response
The era of indifference is over, but the time of consistent and timely
action to prevent and protect has not yet begun. As the SecretaryGeneral noted repeatedly in his report: “More needs to be done.” Let
us speed the day.

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement during the Interactive Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur on
violence against women
27 June 2019
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect.

We would like to thank the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and
consequences for her tireless efforts to recommend measures, ways and means at the local,
national, regional and international levels to eliminate all forms of violence against women,
as this constitutes a violation of their human rights and fundamental freedoms.

We note with appreciation the Special Rapporteur’s focus on the challenges of her mandate
since its inception, and in particular the link between her mandate and other mechanisms. We
concur with the Special Rapporteur that concerted efforts are needed to bridge the gap between
mechanisms with specific focus on violence against women to avoid fragmentation that is
demonstrated in her report.

To concur with the Special Rapporteur’s recommendation on establishing a system-wide
approach to address violence against women, the Group of Friends of R2P has continuously
emphasized the link between the Responsibility to Protect and Geneva-based human rights
mechanisms and institutions to address atrocities, including sexual violence. As the primary
international human rights body, the Human Rights Council, through its procedures and
mechanisms, is particularly well suited to apply preventive measures in situations where early
warning signs of possible atrocities arise.

In this context, we believe that extreme structural and institutionalized forms of gender
inequality and targeted violence against women may constitute potential risk factors for mass
atrocities or even constitute these crimes in itself. To follow the Special Rapporteur’s important
initiative to cooperate with the Committee on CEDAW to ensure better coherence on shared
issues between the mechanisms., we are of the view that the same intrinsic link between the
mandate and the Committee applies to the Women, Peace and Security agenda and the
Responsibility to Protect as well.

Geneva-based human rights mechanisms, in this respect, can play a vital role in strengthening
gender-specific assessment of human rights violations. In addition, through applying a gender
lens to technical assistance and capacity-building measures, the Human Rights Council can
play a key role in supporting governments to uphold R2P and overcome the lack of gendersensitivity in atrocity prevention, thereby furthering the broader sexual violence prevention
agenda.

Other human rights mechanisms, including HRC-mandated Fact-Finding Missions and
Commissions of Inquiry, provide further opportunities for a systematic integration of gendersensitive protection measures and to strengthen the role of women. Women need to be
included in these mechanisms and to lead them. Utilizing the knowledge of female experts and
conducting gender-sensitive investigations can ensure that women’s perspectives and needs
are discussed. Enhancing the focus on the transformation of women’s role in society can
positively contribute to the efficiency of post-conflict and accountability strategies. This will in
turn help preventing the commission of atrocity crimes.

Lastly, it is crucial to recognize that women around the world have always played an essential
role in developing mitigation strategies on an individual, family and community level. In
today’s atrocity situations, women are often times key actors in ininitiatives and efforts to
prevent or respond to atrocities and violence, leading to a tremendous impact on human rights

protection within their communities. It is therefore important that they have our support and
protection.

Security Council resolution 2467 on Women, Peace and Security recognizes that sexual
violence in conflict occurs on a continuum of interrelated and recurring forms of violence
against women and girls. We would like to ask the Special Rapporteur; in your view, what
opportunities do you see in aligning the WPS and R2P agendas to prevent and respond to
sexual violence in conflict? Are we adequately exploring the benefits of gender-responsive
engagement in atrocity prevention and/or accountability processes? And if not, how can we
encourage and develop it?
Thank you.

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the
Secretary-General
25 June 2019
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect1.

The Group of Friends of R2P thanks the High Commissioner for her update. Over the past
years, the Group of Friends of R2P has continuously emphasized the link between the
Responsibility to Protect and Geneva-based human rights mechanisms and institutions. As the
primary international human rights body, the Human Rights Council, through its procedures
and mechanisms, is particularly well suited to apply preventive measures in situations where
early warning signs of possible atrocities arise. Preventing widespread violations and abuses
of human rights is crucial to avoid them developing into mass atrocities. It is our individual
and collective responsibility to prevent that from happening. We further thank the High
Commissioner for highlighting the link between human rights violations and impunity.

In this regard, we would like to thank the High Commissioner and her office for their
preventive efforts in promoting human rights including through the World Programme of
Human Rights Education as well as in highlighting violations and abuses of human rights and
identifying patterns of systematic discrimination against individuals and groups. The
identification of risk factors and early warning signs is essential to prevent widespread
violations and abuses of human rights that could potentially lead to mass atrocities. We
therefore encourage the Office of the High Commissioner to continue to provide regular
information to the Human Rights Council and the UN General Assembly, and to provide
briefings to the UN Security Council, within her mandate. The promotion of a coherent and
comprehensive approach to mass atrocity prevention across the different UN-bodies is key in
upholding our responsibility to protect. We further encourage the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue and strengthen the engagement with the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect.

Besides regular HRC sessions, special procedures, treaty bodies and the Universal Periodic
Review are also key mechanisms for atrocity prevention and have often contributed to the early
warning of atrocity crimes. In addition, Human Rights Council-mandated investigative
mechanisms can play an instrumental role in documenting patterns of widespread human
rights violations, identify perpetrators of possible mass atrocity crimes, and strengthen
accountability processes. Together, this can have an important deterrence effect to prevent the
recurrence of atrocities.

In addition, the Human Rights Council and its procedures plays a crucial role in
strengthening states’ individual efforts to prevent mass atrocity crimes. By providing timely
and targeted technical assistance and capacity building measures, states are able to
strengthen respect for the rule of law and good governance and consolidate effective and
accountable national institutions, which are key elements for effective atrocity prevention.

Côte d’Ivoire, which has previously benefitted from technical assistance and capacity
building by an Independent Expert, serves as an example of how the HRC can contribute to
strengthening domestic institutions and national processes for structural prevention and
guarantees of non-recurrence.

In line with the recommendations from the latest SG report on the Responsibility to Protect,
we underscore the importance of enhancing prevention efforts at grassroots level, for which
assisting domestic, regional and local actors and institutions remains vital. Furthermore,
partnerships and cooperation between UN human rights mechanisms, within their mandates,
and national actors can ensure that atrocity prevention is both a bottom-up and top-down
process. All in all, the variety of human rights mechanisms and institutions allow for contextspecific and comprehensive preventive action.

However, where early warning signs and risk factors are being identified, timely and sustained
action should follow in accordance with the UN charter. The international community must
increase efforts when it comes to early action, as outlined in the Secretary General’s 2018 and
2019 reports on the Responsibility to Protect.

We strongly believe that this Council, and all UN Member States, can, and should do more to
make the responsibility to protect a living reality.

Netherlands, Rwanda, Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
South Sudan, Tanzania, Bangladesh, Japan, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Peru ,
Mexico, Panama, Uruguay, Belgium, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, European Union, Finland, France,
Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Norway, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada.

STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF

The Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect
DELIVERED BY

Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed S. Al-Thani
Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar
to the United Nations

BEFORE

The Open Debate of the United Nations Security Council

ON

Women, Peace and Security: Sexual Violence in Conflict

UN Headquarters - New York
23 April 2019

Please check against delivery

Permanent

Mission

of

the

State

of

Qatar

to

the

United

809 UN Plaza, 4th Fl., New York, NY 10017 - Tel: 212-486-9335 - Fax: 212-758-4952

Nations

Mr. President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of 511
members of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, cochaired this year by Denmark and the State of Qatar.

The Group would like to thank Germany for organizing today’s
important Open Debate. I also would like to extend our gratitude to
Nobel Peace Prize winners Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad
for their informative briefings and persistent efforts to end the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war and armed conflict.

Mr. President,
As the Secretary-General noted, sexual violence in conflict is a
“historically hidden crime” that requires early warning and swift
responses. Sexual violence, including rape, is not just a by-product
of war, but increasingly employed as a deliberate strategy by state
and non-state actors to retaliate against, terrorize, intimidate,
control and displace civilians. Such acts may amount to crimes
against humanity, war crimes, or genocide. Further, sexual violence
in conflict significantly exacerbates and prolongs situations of armed
conflict, destroys the social fabric of communities and impedes
peacebuilding and reconciliation efforts.

Sexual violence is a pervasive facet of many conflicts today,
claiming thousands of victims every year. In South Sudan, sexual
violence in conflict remains rampant, often used as collective
retribution against ethnic rivals. The United Nations Mission in South
Sudan reported 1,157 cases of sexual violence during 2018. And
these are only the reported cases in a context of notoriously
underreported incidents. Similarly, as Ms. Murad has attested, the
Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Botswana, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, European Union, Finland, France,
Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mali,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Peru,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Romania, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, United Kingdom, United States and Uruguay.

1

so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has systematically
committed rape and sexual violence against Yazidi women and girls,
which the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on Syria
has characterized as war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide.

As it is the primary responsibility of member states to protect
their populations against genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and ethnic cleansing, including those involving rape and
sexual violence, the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
would like to stress the following points:
First, strengthening the capacity of national institutions is
critical to ensuring accountability for such crimes in the past, and to
preventing and deterring such crimes in the future. It is of utmost
importance that states put in place and enforce legislative and
institutional procedures to comprehensively address sexual violence
in conflict and prevent its occurrence.

Despite the increased awareness of the issue, most incidents of
mass rape continue to be met with impunity. States have the primary
responsibility to investigate and prosecute crimes committed within
their jurisdiction, and national accountability efforts should be
encouraged and supported, including through the strengthening of
judicial cooperation between states. Fact-finding missions,
investigative mechanisms, commissions of inquiry, hybrid and
international courts and tribunals provide complementary avenues
for accountability when and where options under domestic law prove
insufficient.

Second, there is an urgent need for a survivor-centred approach
to support the needs of victims of sexual and gender-based violence
before, during and after situations of conflict. The international
community should support provision of appropriate medical, psychosocial and socioeconomic reintegration assistance and services to

survivors in order to prevent revictimization and restore the social
fabric of societies after conflict.

Third, at the heart of sexual violence lies a disregard for human
rights, as well as the perpetuation of gender inequality and
systematic discrimination. Sexual violence in conflict must be
addressed with the active and equal participation of women in
identifying prevention mechanisms and holistic, rights-based
solutions that address their needs. It is equally important to continue
to engage men and community leaders to play a positive role in
addressing gender stereotypes and societal exclusion mechanisms.

Fourth, the UN Security Council could and should make better
use of targeted sanctions to prevent and halt sexual violence –
including through basing listing criteria on involvement in the
perpetration of sexual violence.

In this context, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and Panels of Experts should
consistently brief and give information on individuals or entities
responsible for committing sexual violence to sanctions committees,
encourage member states to list them, and recommend targeted
sanctions.

Lastly, training on gender issues, preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse, and addressing sexual violence in conflict should be a
mandatory component of national military and police training, as well
as pre-deployment and in-mission training of all UN peacekeeping
and civilian personnel. In this regard, we support the UN Zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and welcome the
Secretary-General’s initiative on the Voluntary Compact between the
UN and Member States to prevent and eliminate sexual exploitation
and abuse.

Mr. President,
Sexual violence in conflict need not be an inevitable side effect
of armed conflict, it can be prevented and stopped. While significant
normative progress has been achieved in recent years, it is also clear
that words on paper are not yet matched by facts on the ground. In
this regard, it is imperative that the Members of the Security Council
take timely and decisive action aimed at ending and preventing
sexual violence in conflict, if and when they may amount to atrocity
crimes.

In closing, the Group of Friends of R2P would like to recognize
and pay tribute to the important work accomplished by Dr. Mukwege
and Ms. Murad, including providing critical medical and psycho-social
and socioeconomic reintegration support to the survivors of sexual
violence in conflict and addressing impunity for these heinous crimes.

We would like to ask how we, as members of the R2P community,
can more efficiently integrate gender considerations and prevention
of sexual violence into our work.

Group of Friends on R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the
Secretary-General
7 March 2019
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group of Friends on
the Responsibility to Protect.

We would like to express our gratitude to the High Commissioner, who, since taking office six
months ago, has highlighted gross human rights violations and abuses around the world and
called upon the international community to protect those who are the most vulnerable.

Fourteen years ago, the principle of the Responsibility to Protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing was unanimously adopted by all
UN member states. Too often, the ongoing disrespect for human rights can serve as an early
warning sign of situations that may escalate into mass atrocity crimes. This is why the Group
of Friends on R2P strongly believes that Geneva-based human rights mechanisms play a
fundamental role in upholding our individual and shared commitment to mass atrocity
prevention.

Mr. President,
The High Commissioner and her office play an important role in promoting and
strengthening early warning and early action to respond to human rights violations and
prevent mass atrocity crimes. The High Commissioner’s reports and regular updates on
country specific situations are particularly well suited to mobilize action when witnessing an
emerging risk of mass atrocity crimes. Therefore, we strongly encourage the High
Commissioner and her office, in accordance with her mandate, to continue in assisting the
international community to uphold R2P.

In addition to OHCHR, special procedures mandate holders – both thematic and countryspecific – represent a key mechanism to assist states in upholding and deepening their
commitment to R2P in the early and imminent stages of atrocity prevention, including
through strengthening their compliance with obligations under international human rights
law.

The Universal Periodic Review provides a unique opportunity for mainstreaming and
institutionalizing structural prevention, both through strengthening national capacities for
atrocity risk analysis as well as through mobilizing international support through technical
assistance and capacity building.

We further believe that in order to achieve a systematic integration of human rights into
wider discussions and policies of prevention, greater coordination between Geneva-based
human rights mechanisms and other UN agencies and organs as well as regional
organizations and mechanisms is fundamental for developing a comprehensive prevention
framework.

Mr President,
In conclusion, the Group of Friends believes that the international community can and
should lay the ground for the prevention of mass atrocity crimes through strengthening and
deepening its engagement with Geneva-based human rights mechanisms