(spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for having convened
this important meeting on the responsibility to protect
(R2P) and the prevention of genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. I also
wish to note that the United Arab Emirates welcomes
the fact that such a meeting is being held for the second
consecutive year thanks to the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the international community to focus on
the principle of R2P in a world of more protracted
conflicts that is more dangerous to its peoples.

The United Arab Emirates associates itself with the
content of the Secretary-General’s report (A/73/898) on
the importance of being committed to multilateralism
and international law in order to entrench and activate
the conceptual framework of R2P. We therefore
reiterate our international commitments within the
framework of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and we call
on Member States to do the same. The United Arab
Emirates also underscores the importance of a foreign
policy based on humanitarian action so as to support
States to enable them to shoulder their responsibility
and protect their societies.

My country believes that R2P is first and foremost
the obligation of States, as well as a right in itself,
which is linked to specific responsibilities, the most
important of which is to protect the entire population
and ensure their well-being. That must be the key
focus of Governments, as well as prioritizing diversity,
pluralism and multilateralism. We must enhance and
build societies that counter hate speech and support
national authorities in strengthening their capacity to
prevent brutal crimes, as the Secretary-General clearly
points out in his recent reportThe United Arab Emirates believes that effective
prevention is the basis and that the sovereign State
has a responsibility to provide protection that includes
addressing the root causes of conflicts. Since we
believe that incitement to hatred is among the root
causes of conflicts, my country adopted an approach
based on tolerance and has declared 2019 as the Year
of Tolerance in our country. We have enacted laws
to criminalize hatred and discrimination based on
differences between religions, races and sects in order
to bolster coexistence and tolerance in our society.

The United Arab Emirates also stresses the
fundamental importance of the rule of law in ending
impunity and ensuring accountability for collective
atrocity crimes in order to prevent their recurrenceEnhancing early-warning systems is an important step
towards the elimination of genocide. Verifying crimes
through the establishment of integrated and agreed datacollection mechanisms represents another fundamental
step towards ensuring a quick and appropriate response
to any developmentsOur meeting today reflects our collective
commitment to R2P. Before I conclude, I wish to share
with other members the following pointsFirst, we must support the Secretary-General’s
agenda on prevention. The issue of preventing brutal
crimes should be included as a priority item in other
common agendas linked with the three pillars of United
Nations actionThirdly, we must multiply debates and efforts on
prevention and R2P in the regions concerned, including
capitals and regional centres. The United Arab Emirates
believes that regional and national solutions will enable
us to take important steps towards ending brutal crimes
and preventing their recurrence in the future..

Secondly, we must strengthen national resilience,
in particular through national assessments of risks and
resilience, taking into account gender considerations,
including the enhancement of the role of civilians,
especially women and youth, in prevention efforts and
addressing atrocities