(spoke in Spanish): Venezuela, both in its national
legislation and in practice, is committed to respect and
protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms.

We therefore reject the commission of crimes against
humanity, war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing,
all of which are specified in the Rome Statute, to which
we are a signatory party. We reaffirm the role of the
State as guarantor of the security of its population at all
times, and voice our support for justice to be done in
cases where such crimes have been committed.

Equally important, the work of the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on
the Responsibility to Protect makes it possible to
mainstream R2P within the United Nations system.

Croatia encourages continuing this progress and
welcomes the appointment of Ms. Karen Smith as the

Much is said about the importance of prevention.

Who can really oppose the prevention of conflicts or
atrocity crimes, when all States, by signing the Charter
of the United Nations, undertook to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, to promote social
progress and to ensure respect for fundamental human

rights? The same founding Charter, which is binding
on all, also includes principles governing international
relations, such as the legal equality of States, the selfdetermination of peoples, abstention from the use or
threat of use of force against the political independence
of any State, and non-intervention in the internal affairs
of another State. For our country, prevention implies
respect for all of the principles of international law
under the Charter. We must make greater use of the
tools of multilateralism and diplomacy for the peaceful
resolution of disputes, including political dialogue, in
line with Chapters VI and VII of the Charter.

The notion of the responsibility to protect is of
concern to States because of the lack of agreement
on its definition and scope. Many questions continue
unanswered to this day. Who, and on what basis,
determines what State is not protecting its population?
Who determines, and on which criteria, what action
should be taken? How can we prevent its selective
implementation? How can we prevent the responsibility
to protect from being used as a pretext for politically and
economically motivated interventions, including those
disguised as humanitarianism? Why do we not speak
of the responsibility to protect when the Palestinian
people are massacred?
In practice, this notion has been used to promote
invasions that have resulted in suffering, death and
destruction in countries that today still suffer from their
consequences. The peoples were never protected — they
were only an excuse to bring about regime change and
plunder the resources of sovereign nations. This notion,
which at first might have had good intentions behind it,
today lacks total legitimacy, since it is used to intervene
in the internal affairs of States and destroy their
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

If the real objective is to protect the population,
why not promote international cooperation in the fight
against poverty, hunger and social inequality? Why
not put an end to the illegal imposition of unilateral
coercive measures and so-called secondary sanctions?
The world will not continue to be deceived by talk about
human rights, on the one hand, and the imposition of
economic measures that are acts of aggression and
crimes against humanity, on the other. That is the
double standard of racist and supremacist empires that
sustain their domination through wars of colonization
against free and sovereign countries.

Those who manipulate the notion of the
responsibility to protect have destroyed the consensus
that began in 2005, with the World Summit Outcome
document, and ended in 2017, when a vote was forced
here in the Hall (see A/72/PV.2). The naive phase of
humanitarian interventionism is over.

In conclusion, we reject the inclusion of this
item on the agenda of the General Assembly since
Venezuela, as a nation, has been the target of attacks
by the same colonial Powers that perverted the notion
of the responsibility to protect in order to plunder our
national assets and apply economic terrorism against
our people. There are no armed conflicts in Venezuela
today. We are not a threat to anyone. And our public
order is guaranteed by our democratic institutions.

Respect for all the principles set out in the Charter
of the United Nations is the only way to protect our
freedom and our right to peace.