Remarks by H.E. Mr. Yashar Aliyev,
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan at
GA Informal Dialogue on Responsibility to Protect
8 September 2014

Mr. President,
Thank you for convening this important meeting on responsibility to protect,
with a focus on Pillar II.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome Document defined general framework for
addressing responsibility to protect and the scope of its application. It is also
essential that this framework is built on fundamental tenet of international
law, which is the principle of State sovereignty, and thus reinforces the letter
and spirit of the UN Charter.

The protection of population is among the duties and responsibilities arising
from sovereignty. Creation of norms, rules and strong institutions can help
advance reconciliation within societies and strengthen national ownership in
ensuring the protection of population.

The rule of law and respect for human rights lie at the core of the protection
agenda and amount to principal factors contributing to the success of a State's
efforts to protect its population from atrocity crimes. However, as past
experience of crisis situations suggests capacities of States to effectively
respond to them and protect population can be not sufficient, in situation of
armed conflicts they are even more restricted.

It is true that not all conflicts give rise to mass atrocities, but armed conflicts
do create an enabling context for their commission. Such conflicts tend to
have manifold, long- and short term impact on the relevant parties and often
on broader regions. In particular, illicit transfer of arms to non-State actors
ranks among the factors further fueling the situation on the ground, thus
perpetuating a vicious cycle. It is particularly important to ensure that
unreported procurements are revealed and prosecuted.

Illegal economic activities in the conflict areas is yet another source of grave
concern. Existence of natural resources and other assets in such areas,
including those under foreign occupation, is often seen as a factor feeding
narrow political and commercial interests of State and subordinate non-State

actors. Unfortunately, businesses involved in illegal activities indirectly
contribute to increasing means and capacities of war-mongering actors to
consolidate the consequences of the conflict. We welcome the emphasis
placed on these issues in the SG report (A/68/947-S/2014/449) and look
forward to a stronger voice and active role of the UN system and human rights
monitors in halting these illegal detrimental policies and practices.

We cannot agree more with the view of the Secretary-General that a major
risk factor for atrocity crimes is the past commission of such acts and a record
of impunity. Impunity begets further violence, one slaughter is the parent of
the next.

It is critical to make a shift from a culture of impunity to a culture of
accountability with no distinction as to the rank and official status of
individual perpetrators. Bringing perpetrators to justice and holding them
accountable through criminal justice mechanisms are vital to prevent further
atrocities, restore the rule of law and help countries to comply with their
international human rights obligations.

We favour further discussions and efforts to advance the R2P agenda and
continue to consider important the development of the overall strategy for
implementing R2P, including through identifying ways in which the UN
system can help to ensure the fulfillment of our common commitments made
in 2005