REPUBLIC OF
BOTSWANA

 

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF
BOTSWANA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

154 EAST 46TH STREET e NEW YORK, N.Y. 10017
TEL, (212) 889-2277

 

STATEMENT BY

MR. NKOLOI NKOLOI
DEPUTY PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA TO THE UNITED
NATIONS

“AN INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON
THE REPORT BY THE SECRETARY GENERAL
ON THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT”

8 SEPTEMBER 2014
NEW YORK

Please Check Against Delivery  Chairperson,

1. We welcome the opportunity provided by this interactive dialogue to reaffirm Botswana's
commitment to the Responsibility to Protect.

2 Botswana remains deeply committed to the promotion and protection of human rights, the
respect for the rule of law, democracy and inclusive governance. Naturally, these principles resonate
well with the ideals of the Responsibility to Protect as they both aim to protect humanity and improve
governance of societies.

3; As a country, we strive to okay our party by contributing to the responsibility to protect in the
area of prevention, being it's integral part. This, we are able to do primarily through active
participation in fora such as this one, as well as the UN General Assembly, Security Council
debates, Human Rights Council and the Group of Friends of R2P of which we are proud to be a
member.

4. In our efforts to popularize R2P, Botswana co-hosted, with the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
the Fourth Meeting of Focal Points for R2P in Gaborone this past June. The meeting focused
building national capacities to respond to mass atrocity crimes, and it was clear from the level of
participation and highly interactive dialogue that the issue is of notable concern for many countries. It
was also clear that whilst each state has the primary responsibility to protect its citizens, cooperation
and collaboration with the international community is vital. This holds particularly true in developing
countries where institutional capacity is often weak and financial and human resource constraints
are burdensome. We believe that Collective responsibility and effort has a far greater chance of
effectively responding to crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing.

5. We are thus, pleased to note that in his August report on “Fulfilling our collective
responsibility: international assistance and the responsibility to protect", the Secretary General
deemed it necessary to focus on the second pillar of R2P and elaborated on how states can, and
should be assisted in the fulfillment of their protection responsibilities. The report identifies capacity
building as a critical element for the success of any protection effort, a view shared strongly by
Botswana.

6. In this regard, it is our strong hope that the Rights Up Front Action Plan which calls for a
system wide effort to prevent and respond to the risk of Ongoing serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law, gains international traction. Indeed we note that there is
evidence of positive initiatives under the Rights Up Front Action Plan, as well as other efforts by
national and international actors, but there are also real challenges that need to be addressed.

7. The Secretary General highlights some of these challenges and provides recommendations
on the best way forward. Botswana remains open to further engagement on the Secretary General's

Proposals, with a view to contributing to efforts to find durable mechanisms for a effective response
to R2P.

Chairperson,

8. Once again, we. Wish to take this Opportunity to reaffirm Botswana's commitment to the
principle, and work on the Responsibility to Protect