PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS /

Intervention of Costa Rica in the informal interactive didlogo of the Secretary-General

Fulfilling our collective responsibility:

international assistance and the responsibility to protect
Juan Carlos Mendoza, Permanent Representative

68 ° session of the General Assembly. New York, September 08, 2014

 

Check against alocucién

SEFOR President,

We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General and the ideas raised in the panel discussion.

In the approach to the anniversary of the World Summit, called on the international community to renew and
expand its commitment to the ethical imperative to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, the depuraci6n ethnic and crimes against humanity. This is a principle
politician who commits us all, as sovereign states with rights and responsibilities.

We reiterate the need to move from the adopcién retérica concrete measures to meet
our responsibilities in this area. The report presents proposals on concrete forms
that the international community can assist States, encouraging them to fulfill their obligations,
supporting them in the capacity creacién 0 assisting in situations of tension,
They are of great importance to achieve this objective.

When you really assume the principle that no society is immune to the risk of crime
atrocious, we all have the obligacién to protect our people at all times, and
We understand that acknowledge the existence of risk factors in our own society we do not do
weaker, but stronger against this scourge, we will be able to concentrate on what
really it matters: the best way to protect populations. The discusién should focus on how
work together more systematic and long-term goals, and assist each other
to reinforce our national efforts to prevent and reduce the likelihood of that is reached
a point where the resulting peaceful means unviable.

As sefala the report, it is required to know the nature and dynamics of the heinous crimes ys
afadimos, the type of violence 0 human rights violations in our own context
may be risk factors. Examine them through the lens of the "Responsibility
Protect "helps us understand the urgency to address them and to reinforce our conviction about their
inadmissibility. Costa Rica

PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS /

Mr. president,

Costa Rica participates in several initiatives of this nature, as the "Latin American Network for
Prevencidn of Genocide ", the" Global Accién against mass atrocities "and, together with
Denmark, Ghana and Australia, part of the group calls the "Global Network of National Focal Points
for the Responsibility to Protect ".

We also consider important the role in this task bodies such as the Council
Human rights, the Security Council (particularly to the Protection of Civilian include in
operations mandates peacekeeping), the International Criminal Court, organizations
civil society and, of course, the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and
Responsibility to Protect. Private companies could also play a more prominent role,
Guided by the "Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights".

We would like to emphasize the relevance to societies like ours, they have support for
creacién national capacities. Among the proposed measures include assistance
address structural issues related to development that promotes equality and justice
and combat social exclusion, deprivation and related econdmicas disparities; also those
aimed at strengthening the rule of law, respect for human rights and non-
discrimination. Some other more specific measures that are relevant not only in a stage
They tensidn but even in a normal climate of stability, are: strengthening the Ombudsmen
people, the ability to address problems relating to hate speech and prejudice (with
emphasis on media comunicacién), local capacity for the peaceful resolution of
disputes, civilian oversight of the security sector and restricting the availability of weapons
pequefias and light, for what we call the early entry into force of the Treaty
Arms Trade. Likewise, we emphasize the importance of civil assistance and in particular the
work of human rights experts and advisers protection in women.

For the success of these strategies, it is essential that assistance coming from other states,
international agencies or organizations of civil society is set to national priorities
to reflect society as a whole and which take into account existing structures in each
context.

Finally, we express our support for the recommendations of the report, including the idea of
conduct a thorough evaluacién activities undertaken to establish the liability of
Protect and raise an ambitious plan for the next decade