SECURITY COUNCIL

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Statement by
Ambassador Ron Prosor
Permanent Representative

Informal interactive dialogue on the report of the Secretary-
General on the responsibility to protect

United Nations, New York

8 September 2014

Tel: 212-499-5510
PERMANENT MISSION OF ISRAEL : at shedooeets
TO THE UNITED NATIONS , paoo-ss5
800 Second Avenue, 15th Floor info-un@newyork.mfa.g

New York, NY 10017 http://israel-un.mfa.gov.il
lew York, Mr. Moderator,

Our shared duty to protect one another is reflected in a long historical and moral tradition that
dates back millennia and spans cultures and continents.

e Jewish tradition teaches 7172 q¥77 NanK) to ‘love your neighbor as you love yourself.”

¢ The Christian faith teaches the responsibility to assist others in the Parable of the Good
Samaritan.

¢ Islam teaches xpoayP? NPMIN NY NPM? NaN - ‘Wish for your brother, what you wish for
yourself.’

Despite these common teachings, we live in a world that saw the horrors of the Holocaust and
went on to witness the killing fields of Cambodia, the massacres at Srebrenica, and the genocide
in Rwanda.

Mr. Moderator,

Israel welcomes the opportunity to engage in this dialogue and supports the view that in cases of
atrocity crimes, the international community cannot stand idly by.

Israel agrees that the question is not whether or not the responsibility to protect applies in a given
situation, but rather how to tailor an appropriate response in every circumstance - maintaining
flexibility is crucial.

Each of the three pillars that make up the R2P framework is of equal importance. Yet
international efforts must emphasize the strengthening of existing tools and mechanisms rather
than creating new ones. Israel also believes that the R2P doctrine is intended to reinforce, but
not undermine the principle of state sovereignty.

Pillar two reflects the commitment of states to assist one another in focusing on prevention. Yet
the international community continues to focus its attention and resources on reaction.

The cost of inaction can be seen in the hundreds of thousands of lives lost in Syria, Iraq, and
South Sudan where radical extremist groups like ISIS are slaughtering innocent civilians.

Moving forward we must ensure that R2P is not abused. In particular, while the use of force
must remain part of the toolbox, it should be regarded as a measure of last resort.

Mr. Moderator,

Winston Churchill once said, “It is no use saying, 'We are doing our best.' You have got to
succeed in doing what is necessary.”

What is necessary is to unite our efforts around education. Tolerance and mutual understanding
must be fostered in homes, taught in schools, modeled by leaders and woven into the very fabric
of society. As a family of nations, our responsibility to one another stems from our common humanity. Our
moral imperatives supersede whatever politics, religion or geography may divide us. From the
jungles of Africa to the rain forests of South America, we must stand together to ensure people
everywhere have freedom and opportunity.

Let us never lose sight of our responsibility to one another