CANDIDATE
tothe

UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL

PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS — formerem20152018

 

(Please check against delivery)

STATEMENT BY

H.E. AMBASSADOR HUSSEIN HANIFF
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
ON ‘FULFILLING OUR RESPONSIBILITY : INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE

AND THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT’
AT THE INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE OF
THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS
NEW YORK, 8 SEPTEMBER 2014

 

Mr. President,

On the outset, | would like to express Malaysia’s appreciation for convening this
informal interactive dialogue on Fulfilling our responsibility : International assistance and
the responsibility to protect. | would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary General for preparing the report as contained in document A/68/947. This
informal session would enable us to exchange views and perspectives on this important
subject.

Mr. President,

2. Malaysia has been following closely the deliberations on the issue of the
Responsibility to Protect (R2P) and the follow-up dialogue sessions after the World
Summit in 2005. My delegation notes the divergence of opinions continue to persist
among Member States on the concept, understanding and implementation of the R2P.

Malaysia takes note of the importance of Pillar Il which underlines international
assistance through encouragement, capacity building and protection assistance.

3. My delegation is encouraged that the principle of national ownership is reflected
in the Secretary General's report. However, Malaysia upholds that the principles of
sovereignty of States and consent should remain paramount above all else when
considering international assistance. Any international assistance to sovereign States
should be premised on case-by-case basis as governments are accountable to their
national stakeholders.

4. Furthermore, we are of the view that the application of Pillar Il does not provide
the adequate understanding on the relations between the government and its
constitution. Nor does the report underlines the importance of history, culture and
religion that are the essence of a State when considering international assistance.

313 East 43 Street Tel: (212) 986 6310 Email: mwnewyorkun@kin.gov.my
New York, NY 10017 Fax: (212) 490 8576 Website: www.un.int/malaysia Mr. President,

5. My delegation continues to be concerned of the free application of all the three
pillars of R2P. The latest report does not negate the fact that Pillar II should be pursued
only when a State has failed its responsibility to protect its population. This notion of
free application of all three pillars, including Pillar Il can be misleading and that
intervention into the domestic affairs of a Member State is implied.

6. Another observation is that the present report of the Secretary General on the
Responsibility to Protect skirted the human rights situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory from any reference. While the current report reflects the need for human rights
monitoring in Afghanistan, Colombia, Guinea, Iraq, Mali and South Sudan, no mention
has been made on similar needs in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (OPT) and the
continuing human rights violation over the Palestinians. Are the rights of the people of
Palestine unimportant to R2P, or have they been neglected from the responsibility of the
occupying power? Such selectivity and double standards should be addressed.

7. With the humanitarian situation in Gaza deteriorating and worsening, now is the
time to demonstrate action and not merely words, a true commitment on the
responsibility to protect.

Mr. President,

8. When considering the importance of international assistance to strengthen
governments, Malaysia has a proven track record. The Malaysian Armed Forces and
the Royal Malaysian Police continue to conduct training with international partners to
share experiences in law enforcement and protection of civilian in armed conflict.

9. The Malaysian Government has also assisted in capacity building through the
Malaysia Technical Cooperation Programme (MTCP) since 1981. Through the MTCP,
Malaysia has shared our experience in governance, economic development and public
administration. While at the same time, Malaysia has continued to provide assistance
through our participation in the Peacebuilding Commission.

Mr. President,

10. Malaysia does not object R2P, nor are we against such noble efforts to reinforce
and support States’ responsibility to protect its people. Nevertheless, my delegation is of
the view that R2P requires a comprehensive and in-depth discussions so as to enable
the international community to clearly define its understanding, applications,
implementations and effects on States on both international and internal dimensions.

We believe that only through complete understanding and systematic application to all
Member States, can we truly accept R2P as an international norm