Check against delivery

 

PERMANENT MISSION OF MEXICO

Intervencién of Amb. Jorge Montafio, Permanent Representative of Mexico, in the
Informal Interactive Debate on the Responsibility to Protect

New York, September 8, 2014
Mr. Chairman,
We celebrate the realization of this interactive discussion on the responsibility to protect and
We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General on collective responsibility

international assistance.

Could not start without point out that cases like Syria, Iraq, Central African Republic,
and Sudan in the south, among others, are full proof that those States have failed in their
primary responsibility to protect its population, but also as a community
international, who as Organization, we are failing in our responsibility

collective to prevent heinous crimes committed there.

Prevencién means of conflict and peacekeeping with which we
They are not being effectively used. The military response that has been given to such
situations also shows clearly the shortcomings that persist in our model
collective security and is recorded in loss of life and critical delay in

the development of the communities affected by the violence.

We fully agree that we should encourage international assistance through
use of existing mechanisms in international human rights and
International human right. Commitment to the responsibility to protect is
fully compatible with the narrative of protection of the individual and the State
Right. As such, we believe that we must strengthen consistency in their treatment

both the Organization and the mechanisms of States Parties to these instruments. Mr. Chairman,

We must warn about the irrelevancy in which the United Nations may fall.

We regret that the Council's palsy has known against the Syrian case. The nations
United have been forced to attend as silent witnesses to bloody massacres and the use of
destruccién weapons of mass constituting war crimes in the XXI century. Is
situacién infamante for our organization leads us to promote established

limits on the use of the veto against cases of genocide or crimes against humanity.

We must redouble our efforts to share lessons learned, success stories and best
practices regarding responsibility to protect and expand this didlogo in all
levels. In my country, for example, they have begun to address the annual sessions
prevencién of heinous crimes in the framework of the Latin American Network for the prevention
of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. We also participate actively in the Summit

on the prevention of Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, held in London.

Mr. Chairman,

At nine recommendations of the report of the Secretary-General would add two more:
tenth regards to establishing a responsible arms trade in the world, through
the aplicacién of the Arms Trade Treaty. We need to close the door to the
irresponsible trade in arms and weapons that cause so much pain and destruccién in
some countries, while in others it is a profitable business. And a tenth first to be
refers to carry out all necessary adjustments to avoid palsy of our
Organization in cases of genocide or crimes against humanity. Options

operation of the responsibility to protect are on the table.

Mexico makes a call to us to do a reality and that the tenth anniversary of
Summit 2005 is the ocasién to celebrate the evolucién of responsibility
protect its three pillars. We are far from atin make a complete reality, but
we can say that today we have better tools to exercise so
balanced, transparent, with rendicién of accounts and attached to the rule of law