STATEMENT BY MOROCCO AT THE INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON
THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT
-UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST8 SEPTEMBER 2014

Mr. Moderator,
My delegation welcomes this event. That represents this opportunity to deepening
consensus of the concept of the Responsibility to Protect. In particular on the second
pillar, related to measures on national, regional and international actors in providing
assistance and capacity-building to support States in upholding their preliminary
responsibilities.

The 2005 World Summit was a key moment for the concept of R2P. It reflected the
commitment of States to respond to crisis situations in order to protect populations from
the clearly defined crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Furthermore, the Summit defines the scope of application of the Responsibility
to Protect limited to case where, I quote:” States are unable or unwilling to protect its
population against the most serious crimes”. In this regard, my delegation reaffirms its
commitment to paragraph 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome, which
affirms that each individual State has the Responsibility to Protect its population from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Since 2005, and after the publication of the first report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Responsibility to Protect in 2009, this concept has taken a new
dimension in the light of the recent development of the world. If the concept gained widely
support within the international community during the last years, it nonetheless
continues to rise questions on the best way and means of its implementation to avoid and
control implementation and any possible mobilization of political exploitation of its
objectives.

Morocco would like in this regard to reiterate the between the 3 Pillars of the
Responsibility to Protect. Aware of the importance of prevention and the implementation
of the Responsibility to Protect, Morocco would like to stress that States imply primary
responsibility to protect on its own population. In this regard, it is crucial inherence in
the support to States in order to allow them to reinforce national mechanism to protection
of the population through strengthening legal instruments and the consultation of
democracy and rule of law. Capacity-building and technical assistance is the best
preventive measures which enable States to create and enabling an environment to their
respective population.

Morocco accords the establishment during the 2005 World Summit of consensual
formulation of the concept of Responsibility to Protect which makes it clear that this
responsibility much be exercises first of all by none coercive measures as the use of
diplomatic humanitarian and other peaceful means, and only in cases where .. coercive
measures should be considered as last resort with strictly compliance with the UN Charter

In conclusion the Kingdom of Morocco underlines that the full implementation of the
Responsibility to Protect can only be achieved through the consolidation of democracy,
rule of law as well as the 4 aspects of Human Rights and individual and collective
freedoms