General Assembly Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Report of the
Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect

Monday 8 September 2014
New Zealand statement

Ambassador Jim McLay,
Permanent Representative of New Zealand to the United Nations

NEW ZEALAND

UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL
2015-16  Thank you Mr Moderator.

New Zealand welcomes the Secretary-General’s Report and the interactive dialogue
today. We extend our thanks to all of the Panellists for their insights.

At the most practical level, pillar two of the Responsibility to Protect is vital for actively
reducing the risk of mass atrocities occurring. With the best of intentions, not all states
have the means to protect their populations singlehandedly and in isolation. It is for this
reason that at the World Summit our leaders identified the international community's
collective responsibility to help protect populations. At its heart, pillar 2 is about how,
through partnership, we can live up to our shared responsibility. Such Partnerships must
not be understood as something only activated in times of crisis, but something much
more reflective of what we know about preventing mass atrocities.

New Zealand wishes here to focus on a few matters already raised today which we think
are particularly important.

First, we agree that prevention actions must be prioritised. For us, this is a key guiding
principle for Responsibility to Protect. As the Report notes, the need for integrated
prevention mechanisms has consistently been overlooked by the international
community. This Organisation has, for example, long identified conflict Prevention as a
thematic vision but has often not been successful in achieving practical conflict
prevention outcomes. Having a system-wide and coordinated focus on prevention, both
at the pre-conflict stage, and in the post-conflict, rebuilding stage, is vital for laying a
foundation for preventing risk factors for atrocities and conflict from re-emerging.

Second, we welcome the Report's focus on the importance of national ownership. This is
essential if the kinds of assistance identified in the Report are to lead to enduring
improvements which prevent atrocities from occurring. This has been New Zealand’s
experience in our own region. For example; the Regional Assistance Mission to the
Solomon Islands which was discussed in the Secretary-General’s Report, demonstrated
that tailored interventions and nationally-defined objectives were required to achieve
effective and long-term capacity building in the security sector and government
institutions. Cookie-cutter or externally imposed approaches will not work in the long
run.

Third, New Zealand supports fully the focus of the Report on partnerships for
implementing pillar two. The role of regional organisations is vital, as they understand
the realities on the ground. These organisations are well placed to facilitate via existing
channels of communication, and to convene co-ordinated responses which are sensitive
to national concerns. Again, the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands is a
good example, with all assistance provided under the auspices of the Pacific Islands
Forum.

Fourth, the Arms Trade Treaty is an important step toward reducing unregulated arms
transfers and illicit trafficking which so often fuel atrocity crimes. New Zealand has supported the ATT from its inception and is pleased to have ratified the Treaty last week.

We expect the Treaty will reach the 50 ratification milestone in the coming weeks. We
have developed a Model Law which many other states can use to guide their own
implementation of the Treaty, as one practical measure to assist other Member States to
build their resilience.

Mr Moderator,
We once again thank the distinguished Panellists. Time allowing, we would be interested
to hear their views on what practical measures the UN system could take to

operationalise the principle identified in the Report of prioritising prevention