UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, and Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in Kobane, Syria

(New York, 10 October 2014) The Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, express deep
concern about the situation in Kobane, Syria.

The Special Advisers strongly condemn attacks against the lives and physical integrity of
populations in Syria, including by terrorist and armed groups such as the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). The recent offensive by ISIL on Ayn al-Arab, also known as Kobane, on
Syria’s northern border with Turkey, has resulted in numerous deaths and injuries, as well as the
massive displacement of civilians.

“ISIL and other armed groups have reportedly committed grave violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law that may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity,”
stated the Special Advisers. They noted that “the situation in Kobane raises the credible prospect
that the population is at imminent risk of being subjected to similar acts.” The situation “requires
urgent, concerted, and coordinated action from a variety of actors, including regional and global,
to ensure the protection of the population and avert the possibility of further atrocity crimes.”
The Special Advisers also raised special concern about the situation of religious and ethnic
minorities in the area, noting that members of the Kurdish community have fled the city en
masse. They stated that “this latest attack is part of a larger pattern of targeted violence
committed by ISIL and other armed groups against religious and ethnic minority communities in
both Syria and Iraq.” Given the prevailing context of sectarian polarisation and fear of
persecution, the Special Advisers urge all leaders, whether religious, political or military, to
avoid rhetoric that could exacerbate violence. They further call on all actors to “give particular
consideration to assisting religious and ethnic minorities, which are especially vulnerable.”
The Special Advisers urged all actors “to fulfil the commitment reached by the Heads of State
and Government at the 2005 World Summit to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity,” and to cooperate in fulfilling their collective
responsibility to protect. In this respect, the Special Advisers reiterated the “primary
responsibility of the Syrian Arab Republic to protect its population from atrocity crimes” and
expressed concern at its continued failure to do so. They further stated that “the ongoing
commission of atrocity crimes in Syria underlines the urgent need for the international
community to redouble its efforts in order that it may take effective action to resolve the
conflict.”

1

For media queries, please contact:
Marion Arnaud
Outreach Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 6275
Email: arnaud@un.org

2.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, and Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in Iraq
(New York, 12 August 2014) The Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh,
condemn in the strongest terms the reported execution of some 500 members of the Yezidi
community in Sinjar and surrounding areas in northern Iraq by members of the so-called
Islamic State. They also express alarm at reports of the abduction by the “Islamic State” of
some 1,500 Yezidi, Christian and Shabak women and girls.

“These reports are shocking in the extreme. They show, in very clear terms, the complete
absence of humanity of the perpetrators of these crimes,” stated the Special Advisors. They
added that such acts “constitute grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. The reports
we have received of acts committed by the “Islamic State” may also point to the risk of
genocide”.

An estimated 200 thousand people have reportedly fled the advance of militants into the
Sinjar area in the Ninewah governorate of northern Iraq. The “Islamic State” has reportedly
given an ultimatum to those who remain, many of whom are from minority groups, such as
Christians and Yezidis, to convert to the Sunni faith or leave. Mr. Dieng and Ms. Welsh
condemn this practice, and remind the perpetrators that attacks against any individual or
group on the basis of their identity, including their ethnic or religious identity, are prohibited
under international law.

Special Advisers Dieng and Welsh called on the Security Council to prioritise the protection
of civilians in the Council’s response to the current crisis, in particular the protection of
vulnerable religious minorities. They expressed their full support for the efforts of the
international community to provide life-saving humanitarian assistance to communities
displaced by the advance of the “Islamic State”.

The Special Advisers remind all parties that in the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document,
all Heads of State and Government committed to protect their populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, including their incitement, and to
provide assistance to states under stress to fulfil their responsibilities towards their
populations. “The current plight of populations in Iraq”, they emphasized, “calls for a
concerted effort from a variety of actors, both regional and global, to ensure that victims
receive desperately needed support and to avert further atrocity crimes.”
* *** *

For media queries please contact:
Marion Arnaud
Outreach Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 6275
Email: arnaud@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

Statement by the Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Ms. Jennifer Welsh, on the
situation in Israel and in the Palestinian Occupied Territory of Gaza Strip.

(New York, 24 July 2014) The Special Advisers of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, express their
serious concern at the escalation of violence in the occupied Gaza strip and at the targeting of
civilians in the current crisis.

“We express shock at the high number of civilians killed and injured in the ongoing Israeli
operations in Gaza and at the rocket attacks launched by Hamas and other Palestinian armed
groups in Israeli civilian areas.” According to latest UN reports, fighting has resulted in the
killing of 697 Palestinians including over 500 civilians, of whom at least 170 are children and 86
women. According to Israeli sources, a total of 29 Israeli soldiers and three civilians have been
killed, since the hostilities started on 7 July. Homes, schools, medical facilities and basic
infrastructure, including United Nations facilities have been destroyed by military bombardments
in the Gaza Strip by the Israeli forces.

Dieng and Welsh stated that the high number of civilian casualties, particularly among the
Palestinians, could demonstrate disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force by the Israeli
Defence Forces. At the same time, the launching of rocket attacks by Hamas and other
Palestinian armed groups into Israeli residential areas constitutes indiscriminate use of force. In
this context, “both parties are in violation of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, and these acts could constitute atrocity crimes”, the two Special Advisers
observed.

The Special Advisers urge all parties to adhere to the principles of distinction between civilians
and combatants, and between civilian objects and military objectives. They also call upon the
Israeli Defence Forces to fully respect the principle of proportionality.

“We are equally disturbed by the flagrant use of hate speech in the social media, particularly
against the Palestinian population,” stated the Special Advisers. According to reliable reports,
individuals have disseminated messages that could be dehumanising to the Palestinians and have
called for the killing of members of this group. The Special Advisers remind all that incitement
to commit atrocity crimes is prohibited under international law.

Israel, as the Occupying Power, the Palestinian Authority, and Hamas, have the responsibility to
protect the population in Gaza. The Special Advisers call on the three parties to take immediate
measures to ensure the protection of the population. Taking into consideration the dire
humanitarian and human rights crisis in Gaza, the international community also has a
responsibility to assist in protecting the civilian population, first and foremost by encouraging
1

and supporting negotiations towards a ceasefire, and by ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
aid.

“The actions of all parties need to be thoroughly and impartially investigated, and those found
responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity, on either side, must be held accountable
for their actions. Impunity for crimes committed in the past has had a lingering negative effect in
this region. ” noted the Special Advisers. To achieve protection of the population in the region,
the Special Advisers call for an end of hostilities, the creation of a humanitarian corridor, and
lifting of the blockade of Gaza which has created further suffering. The Special Advisers call on
the parties to return to serious negotiations that will end the cycle of violence and achieve a
stable, just and durable solution to this longstanding conflict.

For media queries please contact:
Marion Arnaud
Outreach Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 6275
Email: arnaud@un.org

2.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, and Jennifer Welsh, Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the
Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in Iraq
(New York, 18 June 2014) The Special Advisers to the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and on the Responsibility to Protect, Jennifer Welsh, expressed
deep concern at the deterioration in the situation in Iraq and the impact on Iraq’s populations.

The Special Advisers strongly condemned reports of attacks against the lives and physical
integrity of civilians and other persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including
attacks by terrorist and armed groups such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

Such attacks are violations of international humanitarian law and may amount to war crimes.

“The protection of civilians should be the primary focus of any strategy to address the current
situation”, stated the Special Advisers, who reiterated the United Nations Secretary-General’s
warning of the risk of further sectarian violence on a massive scale, within Iraq and beyond
its borders, noting that the use of sectarian rhetoric could further exacerbate the conflict.

The Special Advisers raised special concern at the situation of religious and other minorities,
noting that members of the Christian community were fleeing the northern city of Mosul en
masse following the ISIL-led invasion. Noting the reports of incitement to destroy Christian
churches, the Special Advisers underlined that: “Given the context of sectarian and
confessional polarisation in the country, special consideration must be given to assisting
religious and other minorities, which are particularly vulnerable”. The Special Advisers noted
that the reported capture of the town of Tal Afar in north-western Iraq raises concerns about
the well-being of Yazidis and other religious minorities living in the area.

They also reiterated the call by the United Nations Security Council for cooperation in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, adding that: “It is key that the Government of Iraq and
Iraqi leaders from across the political spectrum work with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and humanitarian agencies to ensure the delivery of urgently needed
humanitarian relief”.

The Special Advisers called on all parties involved in the crisis and on Iraqi leaders political, military, religious and community leaders – “to abandon strategies of violence and
confrontation, undertake all possible efforts to prevent sectarian reprisals amid the ongoing
violence and to engage constructively to ensure respect for diversity”. Finally, they also
stressed that all States have an obligation to ensure that measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with international law, in particular human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

* *** *

For media queries please contact:
Marion Arnaud
Outreach Officer
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963 6275
Email: arnaud@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

Meeting of the Security Council on the situation in South Sudan
Statement of Under Secretary-General/Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
Mr. Adama Dieng
Your Excellencies, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen.

Firstly, I would like to thank the President of the Security Council, Ambassador Oh Joon, and
other Council Members for inviting me to brief this meeting.

Mr. President, the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, asked the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, and I to travel to South Sudan this week to
follow up on the recent brutal attacks against civilians that took place in the northern town of
Bentiu, including in places of worship and hospitals, and within a United Nations base where
IDPs were sheltering in Bor. We are very grateful to SRSG Hilde Johnson and UNMISS staff
for the support they provided to our very short but intense mission.

I will restrict my remarks to elements that are relevant to my mandate. The violence
that broke out on 15 December 2013, following a power struggle within the ruling Sudan
Peoples Liberation Movement (SPLM) between former vice-President Riek Machar and
President Salva Kiir, has quickly degenerated into ethnic violence. The recent brutal attacks
in Bentiu, Unity state and Bor, Jonglei state, seem to have changed the trajectory of the
conflict and, if such attacks are not immediately halted, could plunge the country into serious
violence that could spiral out of control. In the current situation we see elements that we
could categorize as risk factors of genocide and other atrocity crimes.

In Bentiu, more than 200 civilians of Dinka ethnicity were massacred and more than
400 others wounded, reportedly by opposition forces allied to former Vice President Riek
Machar. According to United Nations reports, the attackers separated ethnic Dinka from
ethnic Nuer civilians and then executed the Dinka and others perceived to support the
government.

In Bor, armed elements reportedly affiliated to the Government forced entry into the
UNMISS camp, in which displaced persons have been sheltering. They killed more than 50
civilians, mostly of Nuer ethnicity, and wounded around 100 others. This attack was
allegedly carried out in revenge for the capture of Bentiu town by opposition forces. In our
meeting with the IDPs in Bor, they expressed fear that the attacks could reoccur anytime and
pleaded with the United Nations to relocate them to somewhere safer, preferably Akobo.

They said that they knew some of the perpetrators and they do not feel safe in Bor, where
they risk being targeted simply because they are Nuer. The UNMISS commander in Bor
corroborated the statements of the IDPs, and informed us that the recent attack was well

1

organized and that attackers included individuals in uniforms of the army of South Sudan, the
SPLA.

Another cause for serious concern has been the reported use of radio in some areas to
spread messages constituting incitement to violence against all those perceived to support the
government. It was reported that in Bentiu, fighters allied to Dr. Riek Machar incited the
civilian population to attack the Dinka, even encouraging their supports to commit acts of
sexual violence against women. This is totally unacceptable.

Mr. President, in our consultations with senior government officials in Juba and with
Dr. Machar, we noted with concern that both sides either denied attacks against civilians or
justified them on the grounds that were carried out in self-defence against a vengeful group.

If we are to ensure the protection of the civilian population in this country, the State must
acknowledge that it has the primary responsibility to protect all South Sudanese irrespective
of nationality, ethnicity or political affiliation and prioritise this responsibility. Blaming one
group or another is simply irresponsible and dangerous.

UNMISS is doing its best under very difficult circumstances and should be
commended. All leaders in South Sudan must assume greater responsibility to ensure that
those under their authority do not commit serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law. They should send strong messages to call for the unity and respect of all
South Sudanese and take immediate measures to end the violence. I am glad that, in our
meetings this week, both President Salva Kiir and Dr. Riek Machar affirmed the will to do
this. I hope that they will now take concrete steps to act on their commitments.

Reports of homogenization of security forces by both camps are worrying, as we
consider the risk of atrocity crimes. The perception that those supporting Riek Machar are
predominantly ethnic Nuer and those supporting President Kiir are predominantly Dinka has
heightened the risk that individuals could be systematically targeted on the basis of ethnicity.

This polarisation is further compounded by reports of exclusion/discrimination on the basis of
ethnicity. For example, in Bor the IDPs reported to us that they have denied access to medical
care by government officials because they are Nuer.

The culture of impunity in South Sudan has contributed immensely to the current
crisis. As we search for peace in this young nation, we must also ensure that those responsible
for crimes committed there are held to account. There can be no peace without justice. The
current culture of impunity will only undermine our efforts. We have learned this the hard
way from events in other places, including from the genocide that took place 20 years ago in
Rwanda. To the survivors of the genocide, we owe a pledge to take all possible measures
within our power to protect populations from another Rwanda. There is no excuse for
inaction.

In this regard, I welcome the IGAD mediation efforts and the role of the African
Union led Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan, which aim to end the violence and to
bring justice to the victims. Both President Kiir and Riek Machar informed us that they are
investigating any serious violations committed by their respective forces and that those found
2

responsible shall be held accountable. We should hold them to this commitment. In our
meeting with the members of the African Union Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan, I
reiterated the expectations of the international community for the work of the Commission to
be independent, thorough and credible and stressed that they should make sure that the
Commission seeks not only to pursue measures for reconciliation and national healing but
also places emphasis on accountability measures. The members of the African Union
Commission of Inquiry requested technical assistance from the UN, in particular the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights. We should do all we can to support their work. I
was encouraged to note from my discussions with IGAD that the IGAD mediation envoys
believe that accountability should be part and parcel of any agreement reached to end the
fighting.

To conclude, Mr. President, we must continue to follow the situation in South Sudan
closely, take whatever measures are most appropriate to protect the population from further
suffering and prevent the situation from spiralling out of control. The risk that it could do so
is clearly high, based on the risk factors that I have highlighted today.

UNMISS has saved lives by opening its gates to protect the population in Bentiu, Bor,
Malakal and other places. The mission is under stress, however, and troop contributing
countries should expedite the deployment of additional troops as part of the UNMISS force
surge to enhance its capacity to protect the population.

If the parties do not clearly demonstrate their will and intention to end the violence
and attacks against civilians, including incitement to commit violence, I believe the Council
should consider taking additional measures against the parties to prevent the situation from
deteriorating further.

We should all support efforts aimed at holding accountable those responsible for
serious violations. The findings and recommendations of the report of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which is about to be released, and other human rights
reports, must be acted on, including - first and foremost - by the national authorities.

Finally, the issue of weaknesses in governance has to be addressed by development
partners. In addition to the seeming disregard for the condition of the population, authorities
have turned a blind eye to corruption. This corruption has also created a clear motivation for
others to take up arms so that they can also access national resources for personal gain.

Today's violence in South Sudan is not motivated by the desire to change the country,
but rather by self-interest goals related to accessing oil wealth and development resources.

The international community must not be complicit in this agenda. Prevention of further
violence therefore requires coordinated international response that includes a new posture by
development partners. Any resolution should take this into account.

Excellencies, we must uphold our collective responsibility to protect the populations
of South Sudan from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, as
well as their incitement. Ethnicity must not be used as a reason to incite violence or
demonise, exclude or attack any community or section of the population in South Sudan.

Adama Dieng
Under Secretary-General
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
2 May 2014

4.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
Media Briefing by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide on Mission to South Sudan

(Juba, 30 April 2014), The United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Kimoon, asked the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay and I
(his Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide) to visit South Sudan
this week to follow up on the recent brutal attacks against civilians in the
northern town of Bentiu, where people were killed even in places of worship
and hospitals, and within a United Nations base in Bor, where IDPs were
sheltering. Of particular concern to us, also, were reports of the use of the
radio in Bentiu to incite ethnic violence, including sexual violence against
women.

As the High commissioner has informed you, we have held consultations in
South Sudan with senior government leaders, including with President Salva
Kiir and some of his ministers, civil society, displaced persons and the
leader of SPLA/M in Opposition, Dr. Riek Machar. From these consultations
and other available reports, it is clear that the conflict has taken a dangerous
trajectory, and civilians are being deliberately targeted based on their
ethnicity and perceived political affiliation.

My primary focus is the prevention of genocide and other related atrocity
crimes. My office advocates for measures to protect populations from being
targeted on the basis of their identity. What is happening in this country has
put the population at high risk of serious violence. In our meetings, we have
reiterated and reminded the President and the government that the state has a
primary responsibility to protect all South Sudanese, irrespective of their
ethnic, national or political affiliation.

UNMISS is doing its best under very difficult circumstances. South Sudan
leaders must assume higher responsibility to ensure that those under their
authority do not commit serious violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law. They should send strong messages to call for the unity
and respect of all South Sudanese and take immediate measures to end the
violence. I am glad that in our meetings this week they have both affirmed
the will to do this. I hope that they will now take concrete steps to act on
their commitments.


As we search for peace in this young nation, we must also ensure that those
responsible for crimes committed here must be held to account. There can be
no peace without justice. The current culture of impunity will only serve to
undermine our efforts. We have learned this the hard way, from events in
other places, including from the genocide that took place 20 years ago in
Rwanda. To the survivors of the genocide, we owe a pledge to take all
possible measures within our power to protect populations from another
Rwanda. There is no excuse for inaction.

In this regard, I welcome the IGAD mediation efforts and the role of the
African Union led Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan aimed at ending
the violence and bring justice to the victims. The region should strive further
and take urgent measures to end the violence. To paraphrase the President of
Kenya, who is also the chairman of the East African community, recently
stated as follows:
“ It is heart-wrenching for us in IGAD, EAC, African Union and indeed the
wider global community to sit and watch atrocities being committed on daily
basis. This must be put to a stop.” He further he called upon all parties to
bring their military activities and killing of innocent people to an immediate
end and bring to account those involved. This is a very welcome and I urge
all the regional leaders to support South Sudan in this effort.

South Sudan should not be led down this slippery slope. As I leave Juba, I
beseech everyone; the South Sudanese, your leaders, the regional and the
international community, to take immediate measures to end the violence
and uphold our collective responsibility to protect the populations of South
Sudan from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. Ethnicity should not be used as a reason to incite violence or
demonise and exclude any community or section of the population. The
world is watching. Those responsible for serious violations must be held
accountable.

South Sudanese should also engage on genuine reconciliation, that will
ensure they coexist as one people. Their diversity should not be used to
divide them but should be their strengthen to live as one nation. Everyone in
this country has a role to contribute towards this end. I encourage the
government to engage with all actors, including the civil society, community
and religious leaders as you forge for peace. remain vigilant to end the

violence and ensure peace. This is your country and you have even a bigger
responsibility to bring peace to south sudan.

Thank you
Adama Dieng,
Under Secretary-General/ Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide

.

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

Meeting of the Security Council in Arria format on
Inter-communities Dialogue and prevention of crimes in Central African Republic
Statement of Under Secretary-General/Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
Mr. Adama Dieng
Your Excellencies, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen.

I thank the Permanent Missions of France and Nigeria, particularly His Excellency
Ambassador Gérard Araud and Her Excellency Ambassador Joy Ogwu, for convening this
meeting to exchange ideas on actions that could promote inter-community dialogue and the
prevention of atrocity crimes in the Central African Republic.

Your Excellencies, since my last briefing to the Security Council on 24 January 2014,
the situation in the Central African Republic has deteriorated significantly. We are facing a
very serious protection crisis with continued, brutal, targeted attacks against individuals and
groups on the basis of their religious affiliation and lack of capacity by the transitional
authorities and international actors to protect those at risk. The Central African Republic
provides a clear example of how armed elements can manipulate communities and incite
them to violence along religious lines even in situations where these communities have lived
peacefully together for generations.

The retreat of the ex-Seleka from Bangui has sparked renewed attacks against their
remaining members, their associates and their perceived supporters, as well as the Muslim
population as a whole. Muslims are now being deliberately and systematically targeted by the
anti-Balaka and by mobs of civilians in Bangui and in the countryside. These attacks have
reportedly involved mass killings, targeted assassinations and public lynching, sexual
violence, , looting and the destruction of property. Mob violence has reached unprecedented
levels. Such attacks are publicly referred to by the anti-Balaka as “cleansing operations”.

There are reports of hate speech by anti-balaka on public media referring to Muslims as
“rotten potatoes” and public justification of their actions.

Every day we hear of horrific attacks against Muslim civilians by anti-Balaka or
mobs. The gruesome nature of the attacks and mutilation of the bodies of the victims, as well
as desecration of places of worship, are clear signs that the attacks are intended to send a
strong message to the victim group. For example, on 28 February 2014 the Muslim Deputy
Mayor of Mbaiki, which is located 60 miles south of Bangui,, was attacked in cold blood by
his own neighbours, who are predominantly Christian. He was speared to death, his body
decapitated and mutilated, just a few metres from a police station. He had been one of fewer
than ten Muslims left in the town out of a pre-conflict population of 2,000. Twelve suspects
were arrested, some with fresh blood on their machetes, but they were immediately released.

1

In addition to physical attacks, in some locations, for instance in Boda (190 km from Bangui),
anti-Balaka elements are reportedly preventing civilians from selling food to Muslims,
thereby imposing conditions that threaten the lives of this group.

The deliberate and targeted violence against Muslims has emptied Bangui and many
other major towns of their Muslim population. . Many Muslims have fled to the north of the
country and others have fled across borders. It is reported that only about 20% of the total
Muslim population are left in CAR, the rest have been forced to flee outside the country. The
remaining between 15,000 and 20,000 Muslims across the country are at high risk and
urgently require protection. Such widespread and systematic targeting of civilians based on
their religion or ethnicity indicates that crimes against humanity are being committed and that
the risk of genocide remains high. There is a pressing and urgent need to protect the civilian
population in the Central African Republic, especially the Muslim minority, from the atrocity
crimes being committed. As the Under Secretary-General for Humanitarian Coordination,
Valerie Amos, indicated in her briefing to the Security Council last week, “Unless the current
trajectory is urgently reversed, the demographic and social changes taking place in the
Central African Republic will have severe and lasting consequences for the country, the
region, and the continent”.

Your Excellencies, there is no doubt that the actions of MISCA, the African Union
peacekeeping force, and the French and EU troops, have contributed immensely to the
protection of Central Africans, particularly in and around IDP camps. It is clear that security
and stabilization of the situation remains a top priority. However, it is also evident that
resources and capacity of the international forces to protect the population are limited, given
the scale of the violence and the fact that it is happening across the country. Today’s
discussion on “inter-communities dialogue and prevention of atrocity crimes” is extremely
important, given these developments. It will be difficult to achieve peace, security and
stability in the Central African Republic without a significant part of the population, the
Muslim population.

The country risks being divided, with a Muslim north and a Christian south, as
Muslims are forced to flee for safety to the north. We know that atrocities have been
committed by both sides; the ex-Seleka violations and abuses that were perceived to be
against Christians prompted the anti-Balaka reprisal attacks against Muslims, which are now
out of control. We have to work together, urgently, to find ways to promote reconciliation
between these two communities that have traditionally co-existed peacefully.

While in Bangui in December 2013, I met with religious leaders, including
Archbishop Dieudonne Nzapalainga and Imam Oumar Loayama, who are here with us today.

We must pay tribute to their courage and determination to convey peace messages to their
followers even amidst an atmosphere of hatred and desolation. As we in the international
community call for a strengthened protection force in the Central African Republic, for
support to transitional authorities to restore state authority and for a political process, we
must not forget that reconciliation must be at the heart of any process to secure peace among

2

Central Africans. Let us try our best to support the work of these religious leaders and all
other initiatives aimed at restoring national and social cohesion.

My Office is working with the Transitional Authorities to launch a national committee
on the prevention of genocide and other atrocity crimes in accordance with the ICGLR
Protocol on the prevention and punishment of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and all forms of discrimination. We hope that this committee will be launched in May 2014.

We have agreed with the Authorities that the national committee will be used as a vehicle to
carry out community level peace forums across all the sixteen provinces in the country. We
have emphasized to the authorities the need to ensure that the national committee includes
both state and non-state actors, particularly religious leaders, civil society, youth and women
representatives.

I would like to finish by emphasizing that it is hard to achieve peace and
reconciliation without justice. The dialogue between communities should also include the
objective of bringing the perpetrators of crimes committed to justice. Religious and
community leaders have a moral obligation to call for justice and to speak out for the victims
of atrocities. National authorities should take the lead in the pursuit of justice. I call on the
transitional authorities as well as regional and sub-regional leaders and the broader
international community to support all initiatives aimed at ending impunity. If perpetrators go
unpunished they will continue to kill, maim, rape, loot and commit atrocities. We must give
our full support to the work of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry and of the
International Criminal Court to establish the facts about what has taken place and obtain
justice for the victims.

The Central African Republic is on the brink; we must remain committed to the
clarion call of “never again” and save lives while we still can.

Adama Dieng
Under Secretary-General
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
14 March 2014

3.

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

The statement of Under Secretary-General/Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide Mr. Adama Dieng on the human rights and humanitarian dimensions of the
crisis in the Central African Republic
22 January 2014

Mr. President, members of the Council, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen.

I thank the Permanent Missions of Jordan and Luxembourg, particularly His Excellency
Ambassador Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein and Her Excellency Ambassador Sylvie
Lucas, for convening this briefing on the human rights and humanitarian dimensions of the
crisis in the Central African Republic.

Mr. President, as you are aware, I visited the Central African Republic between 17 and 21
December 2013 together with my colleagues Leila Zerrougui, the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict and Nancee Bright, who represented Zainab Bangura, the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Our main objective was to assess the risk of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity (atrocity crimes) occurring in the country
and to advocate with transitional authorities and other relevant stakeholders for a cessation of
violence and enhanced protection of the civilian population.

It was evident from what we saw and heard that the situation in Central African Republic was
desperate. We received reports, and testimonies from victims and witnesses, that told of
shocking episodes of violence perpetrated against innocent Central Africans, including women
and children. And this violence continues, even as we are discussing the human rights and
humanitarian situation in CAR today.

As I said in my previous statement at the “Arria formula” meeting of the Security Council on
1 November 2013, we face a situation of widespread and massive violations of human rights
and abuses, such as has never been witnessed before in the country. There have been
widespread reports of summary executions and other forms of extrajudicial killings;
enforced disappearances; forced displacement; and acts of mutilation and sexual violence
committed against adults and children, as well as the destruction and widespread looting of
property, including hospitals, schools, churches and mosques.

At the same time, as you will hear in greater detail from my colleague ASG Kyung-Wha Kang,
the humanitarian situation is equally very disturbing. Thousands have fled to seek refuge in
neighboring countries, while some 902,000 people have been displaced across the country. In

Bangui, which has witnessed the highest level of violence, one in every two residents has been
displaced from their homes.

Who is Responsible?
In response to continued attacks by ex-Séléka elements targeting Christian civilians since
December 2012, traditional, community-based self-defence groups across the country evolved
into a more organised Christian militia known as the “anti-Balaka”, which has targeted exSéléka members and Muslim civilians suspected of supporting the ex-Séléka. Reports received
indicate that the anti-Balaka militia are getting more organized than before and reportedly
include some former army soldiers sympathetic to former President Bozize. These former
soldiers have reportedly played a leadership role in organizing attacks against Muslim
civilians. For example, attacks in Bangui on 5 and 6 December resulted in the death of at least
1,000 people, most of whom were ex-Séléka members and Muslim civilians. In interviews
with some individuals who claimed to be members of anti-Balaka militia in Bangui, they
alleged that the militia have deployed in all the sixteen provinces in the country to mobilize
Christian civilians against Muslim civilians.

On the other hand, the ex-Séléka elements continue to carry out attacks against Christian
civilians throughout the country. While in CAR, we received testimonies who witnessed the
killing of Christian civilians by ex-Séléka during a series of reprisal attacks.

The religious leaders in Bossangoa had divergent views on who bear responsibility for the ongoing violence in the Province. The Bishop of Bossangoa Diocese, decried the abuses
committed against Christians and the perceived complicity of the Muslim communities. On the
other hand, the representative of the Muslim community in Bossangoa decried continued
attacks against Muslims by anti-Balaka who, in his view, were being hosted and supported by
the local Catholic bishop.

In consultations with the then Head of Transition, Michel Djotodia, I stated to him clearly that
he bears primary responsibility for security and that he should take all measures possible to
protect all populations, irrespective of their ethnic or religious affiliation. We urged Mr.

Djotodia to join forces with religious leaders and civil society to immediately embark on a
reconciliation campaign aimed at putting an end to the violence and to the hatred between
communities.

The Sectarian Element of the Conflict
Mr. President, the violence that was initially perceived as a confrontation between ex-Séléka
and anti-Balaka militia quickly evolved into a very dangerous confrontation between Muslim
and Christian civilians and the level of hatred between these communities shocked me.

Incitement to commit violence on the basis of religion or ethnicity and deliberate and targeted
attacks against civilians based on their identity are both factors that indicate a high risk both of
crimes against humanity and of genocide.

-2-

Protection of the Civilian Population
There is no doubt that the actions of the African Union peacekeeping force known as MISCA
and of French troops have contributed immensely to the protection of Central Africans,
particularly in and around IDP camps. However, it is evident that their resources and capacity
to protect are limited, given the scale of the violence and the fact that it is happening across the
country MISCA is still only partially deployed. There is an urgent need for the full deployment
of MISCA peacekeepers as soon as possible.

Another concern emerging from our mission and which has had a negative impact on civilian
protection was the perception by some that peacekeepers deployed in the country were not
neutral. Some interlocutors alleged that peacekeepers, in some instances, are perceived to side
either with anti-Balaka or ex-Séléka elements, which has eroded trust in some instances and
affected their capacity to act.

In our interaction with religious leaders, we noted that despite concerted efforts by the
Archbishop and the Imam of Bangui to promote peace and dialogue, the impact of the
initiatives undertaken since December 2012 remains limited. There is an urgent need to
support – and intensify - such inter-religious dialogue both at the national and at the
community level.

Overall Assessment of the Situation
In my assessment, the widespread, unchecked nature of attacks by ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka
militia, as well as by armed civilians associated with them, against civilians on the basis of
religion or ethnicity constitute crimes against humanity. If not halted, there is a risk of
genocide in this country.

What can be Done?
The primary responsibility for the protection of its populations lies with the Central African
authorities. However, recognizing the fact that the transitional authorities have neither the
capacity to protect the civilian population nor to exercise control over the armed elements that
are attacking the civilian population, particularly women and children the international
community must take concrete measures to assist the State to stop the abuses and protect the
civilian population. There is urgent need to support the full and effective deployment of
MISCA. African countries should urgently contribute troops to this mission.

There should be concerted efforts to promote and support a national peace and reconciliation
process. There is urgent need to promote dialogue between Christians and Muslims to mitigate
the existing ethnical and religious divisions in the country. As a first step among a series of
initiatives in the country, my office is working to support the efforts of the President of the
Commission on Human Rights of the National Transitional Council and the National
-3-

Coordinator of the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to organise
peace forums in the country that will bring together community and religious leaders from
seven provinces. But this is not enough, and I urge the international community to contribute to
this process.

It will be difficult to promote reconciliation and restore peace in the country without
addressing the current culture of impunity. The human rights violations and abuses that have
occurred have sowed seeds of hatred in communities. It is very important that we support all
initiatives, including the Commission of Inquiry, to identify perpetrators and hold those
responsible for violations and abuses accountable. We should also consider the establishment
of transitional justice mechanisms. There can be no excuses or justification for condoning
impunity.

Although the international community is responding late in the day, there is still a window to
act to mobilize appropriate resources and to reverse one of the worst human rights and
humanitarian crises of our time. We need to uphold our responsibility to protect Central
Africans from the risk of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity yesterday.

Adama Dieng
Under Secretary-General/Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
United Nations Headquarters
New York
Check against delivery

-4-