Permanent Mission of

PARAGUAY

TO THE UNITED NATIONS

Declaration by the Republic of the Paraguay

"INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE LIABILITY OF STATES
TO PROTECT ITS POPULATION GENOCIDE AND OTHER CRIMES "

AMBASSADOR JOSE ANTONIO DOS SANTOS

New York, September 8, 2014

(Please check against reading)

 

Statement of the Republic of Paraguay

"INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE RESPONSIBILITY OF STATES TO
PROTECT THEIR POPULATIONS BY PREVENTING GENOCIDE AND OTHER CRIMES "

AMBASSADOR JOSE ANTONIO DOS SANTOS

New York, September 8 "2014

(Please check against delivery)

 

 

Candidate for the Human Rights Council 2015 - 2017 to
Toaperina on TETA & ReKUAI

 

fanusremo we GOVERNMENT) NATIONAL
Exteriors we LE AY
Permanent otlisitn the Repitblica of the Paraguay to the United Nations
New York

 

"INFORMAL INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE RESPONSIBILITY OF STATES TO
PROTECT THEIR POPULATIONS BY PREVENTING GENOCIDE AND OTHER
CRIMES "

Statement of the Republic of Paraguay
Mr. Chair,
Distinguish Delegates,

The Government of the Republic of Paraguay is Committed to the realization and the
Promotion of International Law. In particular it is Committed to the implementation
and of Obligations Undertaken in the realms of the International Law of Human
Rights and the International Humanitarian Law. For These Reasons, the Delegation of
Paraguay has engaged in esta initiative of in-depth dialogue on the concept of the
States' Responsibility to Protect. The Delegation of Paraguay underscores the
relevance of this Debate for the international community as well as the significant
Reached results last year's During the debate, and appreciation Welcomes With the
That participation of Delegations taking part are in this Debate This Year.

The Delegation of Paraguay appreciates the efforts of all delegations to participate in
this discussion, and encourages them to keep contributing and enriching this debate.

The Delegation of Paraguay also encourages other Delegations to join this debate in
order to make initiatives to achieve full respect of human rights and international
humanitarian law more effective.

The Republic of Paraguay is committed to the compliance of the International
Human Rights Law and of the International Humanitarian Law, and recognizes the
responsibility to protect. Indeed, the Republic of Paraguay has ratified all
international instruments referred to in the Report of the Secretary—General entitled,
"The Responsibility to Protect: State responsibility and prevention", dated July 9,
2013. Furthermore, it has ratified most international instruments on humanitarian
protection of civilians and disarmament.

In addition to these ratifications, the Government of Paraguay is in the process of
ratifying the Convention on Cluster Munitions and has also prompted legislative
procedures to incorporate to the National legislation the implementation of the Rome
Statute, by establishing additional jurisdictional mechanisms to enhance institutional
complementarity in order to protect the civilian population from genocide and other
crimes against humanity as well as to guarantee the prosecution of such crimes.

The Republic of Paraguay is also a part in regional initiatives to protect and to
i

 

Please check against delivery

September 8", 2014 TESS BANDE TETA \ REKUAI

 

rants ae GOBIERNO NACIONAL
EXTERIORES
Misidn Permanente de la Repithleca del Paraguay ante las Nisoiones Vidas
Auena York

 

promote the International Law of Human Rights and the International Humanitarian
Law. For instance, it promotes the eradication of related causes that could result in
crimes against peoples as an active member of the Latin American Network for the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.

Also, with the support of the Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide of the United Nations, the Government of Paraguay has undertaken a
number of initiatives to raise awareness and build capacity on the issue of prevention.

For example, it has put in place interactive seminars, targeting government officials
and members of the civil society that installed the debate on the States’ Responsibility
to Protect within the Paraguayan civil society. The Delegation of Paraguay takes this
opportunity to thank the support of the Office of Special Advisor for the Workshop:

"Introduction of the Latin American Network for the Prevention of Genocide and
Mass Atrocities to the Civil Society — Chapter Paraguay", that took place in August
27 - 28, 2014, in Asuncion.

Mister Chair,
Distinguish delegates,

The debate on the States’ Responsibility to Protect necessitates universal attention;
there is need for further analysis and discussion at the intergovernmental level. These
have been the lessons drawn from the initiatives that the Government of Paraguay
has undertaken to promote and to guarantee at the national level respect for Human
Rights as well as for the International Law of Human Rights and the International
Humanitarian Law.

Therefore, the Government of the Republic of Paraguay encourages other States to
continue their active engagement and to deepen the debate on the States
Responsibility to Protect, in order to ensure and guarantee the protection of civilian
populations, without discriminations of any kind.

The Delegation of Paraguay welcomes the Report of the Secretary-General recently
introduced and reiterates the trust of the Government of Paraguay in the mechanisms
of the United Nations to maintain international security.

Finally, Mister Chair, the Delegation of Paraguay reiterates its commitment with this
initiative that will contribute to the full respect of the fundamental rights of human
beings