PHILIPPINE STATEMENT
(Reading Copy)

Responsibility to Protect:
6 Annual Interactive Dialogue on the Secretary-General’s Report

08 September 2014

Mr President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The debate on R2P has progressed a lot since it was introduced in the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document.

The Philippines upholds the rule of law as the basis for both the legitimacy of a
state and the civilized conduct of relations among nations.

We join other Member States in affirming their fundamental duty to protect their
own people from atrocity crimes.

We subscribe to our shared responsibility of encouraging and lawfully assisting
other states in helping them prevent these crimes.

Our long-standing respect for the sanctity of human life and fundamental human
rights and freedoms is a cornerstone of national policy.

Our obligation to prevent atrocity crimes does not invite ways and means that are
outside the ambit of the Charter of the United Nations. The principle of state sovereignty
is sacrosanct; it is the building block of international law and the conduct of international
relations. We thank the Secretary-General for his report in recognizing this overriding
principle.

We also agree that assistance and capacity-building in the economic, political
and humanitarian spheres should be based on a clear understanding of the nature of
atrocity crimes. In addition to States, international and regional organizations, civil
society and the private sector, have a lot to contribute in this regard.

Mr President, how often have we heard it said that, in the full range of
developmental issues, “no one size fits all’? That there is a need for “flexibility”?

We believe that so it is in the debate on R2P, as some States have expressed. On the other hand, since 2009 up to the present, some States have also taken
the view that R2P to be accepted as a norm should be consistently and uniformly
applied.

The challenge is that we want the consistency and predictability that the rule of
law prescribes, while at the same time situations that may implicate R2P need to be
examined on a case-to-case basis.

The Philippines supports the continued dialogue on R2P in the General
Assembly as the appropriate forum to discuss the matter. It highlights the priority we
give to human rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly the right to life.

We should also continuously examine and strengthen our institutions, from the
domestic level, to regional organizations, and multilateral institutions. Working methods
and procedure — including the use of the veto by the Security Council P5 on R2P
situations ~ must continuously be assessed and critiqued.

Preventive diplomacy should be exhausted and enhanced. We need to more
seriously discuss and interphase R2P with mediation, dialogue, negotiation, targeted
sanctions and referral to the ICC, and those tools mentioned in the UN Charter.

Finally, the Philippines believes that education is key to arresting atrocity crimes
and nipping them in the bud. It cannot be stressed enough that education and shared
values and cultures, in all its diversity, should be promoted and ingrained at all levels of
education