THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA

PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

335 East 45" Street, New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel (212) 439-4000, Fax (212) 986-1083

 

Statement by Ambassador Paik Ji-ah

Deputy Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
Fulfilling our collective responsibility: International assistance and the responsibility to protect
General Assembly Informal Interactive Dialogue

8 September 2014

New York
<Check against delivery>

 

Thank you, Mr. President.

First of all, my delegation would like to thank Dr. Welsh and the panelists for their informative
presentations. My appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General for providing this important
occasion to deepen our understanding of the concept of R2P.

I would also like to commend the efforts of the Special Advisers and the Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect (R2P) in preparing this year’s report.

The ideas we shared in the previous rounds of informal dialogues have been incorporated in a
number of UN documents, including Security Council resolutions. It is very encouraging that we
can refer to the concept of R2P in making important decisions at the UN, and that this principle has
been increasingly “mainstreamed”.

While expressing our support and appreciation for the principles and the different forms of
international assistance presented in the report, my delegation would like to draw your attention on a
few points we consider necessary to address.

First, it is essential to strengthen coherence and coordination of international assistance for an
effective use of existing development tools in fulfilling the responsibility to protect. A thorough R2P impact assessment should be the basis of designing and delivering different forms of international
assistance. In this regard, I am pleased to inform Member States that, in May, the Republic of Korea
became the first country in the region to have appointed a national focal point for R2P. We can use
the network of national focal points to share impact assessments and best practices, and we hope
more Member states can join this network.

Second, we need to identify the linkages between the concept of R2P and international development,
with a view to embody applicable R2P principles in a longer-term and wider development agenda.

We believe that human and economic development has a strong correlation with the resilience of a
society against atrocity crimes, and it is thus crucial that capacity-building for good governance
based on rule of law and respect for basic human rights should be an integral part of any long-term
global development agenda.

Third, the international community should renew its commitment for prevention of atrocity crimes
by strengthening its capacity to detect early warnings. We can put more emphasis on peer reviews
and the inquiring mechanism of the Human Rights Council, and incorporate their results in our
prevention efforts. In this regard, the role of preventive diplomacy as a form of Pillar II measures
should also be further boosted.

Last but not least, another critical challenge is to inspire responsiveness to encouragement and
assistance, particularly where state authorities are fueling the dynamics of atrocity crimes. Given
that all forms of international assistance are intrinsically based on the consent of States, the access to
and impact of Pillar II measures are extremely limited in such situations. These situations remind us
once again that the three pillars of R2P should be implemented holistically and in a mutually
reinforcing way.

Mr. President,

Building upon the constructive discussions we had, the lessons we learned, and the efforts of the
Special Advisers, my delegation believes that it is time to consider including the implementation of
R2P on the formal agenda of the General Assembly in order to articulate concrete measures and to
generate necessary political. In this respect, my delegation, as a member of the Group of Friends of
the R2P, is ready to continue to work with other Member States, the Secretariat, and the civil society
to further implement the responsibility to protect