STATEMENT

by
A. E. Franti8ek Ruzitka

Permanent Representative of Slovakia
to the United Nations

Informal interactive dialogue on the report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility
to protect

8 September 2014
New York

-Check against delivery- Mr Chairman,

First, I would like to thank Mr Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and President of the General
Assembly John Ash for their introductory words. I would also like to thank Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Elliason and other panellists for their inspirited thoughts.

At the outset, I would like to align myself with the statement presented earlier by the
distinguished representative of the European Union.

Slovakia highly appreciates the insightful report on the Pillar II assistance prepared by the
Secretary-General. We believe that with the coming tenth anniversary of the concept of
Responsibility to Protect the time has come to reflect on both, what the international
community has done and what it needs to do to meet its collective duty to protect civilians
from atrocity crimes.

The creation of the concept was a reaction to genocide in Rwanda and Srebrenica. In these
two cases the international community failed to prevent probably the worst atrocity crimes
committed after World War II. Unfortunately, more recent examples such as the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and the increase in brutality of radical movements such as
Boko Haram and ISIS indicate that we still have a long way to go in increasing capacity of
national and international cooperation in prevention of atrocities and protection of civilians,

Today with the benefit of hindsight, we are discussing the second pillar of R2P on how the
actions of international community can prevent from repetitions of these horrible crimes.

Although we should never forget the initial uncertain beginnings of the incorporation of
Responsibility to Protect into practice, the recent developments speak clearly of the progress
we have made in the course of last decade.

Let’s not speak on the negative note only. The assistance provided to Colombia by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights which helped establish independent
intelligence services in the state or the UN peace operation in South Sudan are but two
examples of the concept’s successful implementation.

Mr Chairman,

It is in the interest of the international community as a whole to adhere to the word and spirit
of our Pillar II obligations. As much as we acknowledge that Responsibility to Protect is
based on the principle of collective action, we feel it important to emphasise the consensual
nature of the Pillar II assistance. Pillar I is inherently linked to Pillar I state’s primary
responsibility to protect its own population from atrocity crimes. Only and exclusively with
the consent of the host state and preferably upon its own request, may the international
community make use of its Pillar II responsibility.

The encouragement and assistance provided by the international community must fully
respect state sovereignty. Resolution 1996 on the establishment of a UN peace operation in
South Sudan as well as Resolution 2014 that reminded the government of Yemen of its
primary responsibility to protect its own civilian population may serve as telling examples of
how respect for state sovereignty is inherent in the spirit of Pillar II.

Mr Chairman, The underlying rationale of Pillar II assistance is the idea of prevention. Rather than
addressing past crimes, any encouragement, capacity building or protection assistance should
aim to prevent atrocity crimes from being committed. To this end, several precursors of an
arising conflict can be identified. The extent to which Human Rights standards are upheld
in a host state may serve as an effective indicator of a forthcoming conflict.

Slovakia strongly encourages the establishment of monitoring bodies that would closely
screen Human Rights situation on the ground. With periodical reports, Human Rights
standards may become not only the main elements of Responsibility to Protect, but also the
key triggers of the Pillar II collective obligations,

When it comes to prevention, the role of the International Criminal Court is
indispensable. It serves not only as an independent and impartial judicial body prosecuting
situations where national jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to address the issue of
accountability, but through its authority has a preventive impact. In this regard, we call on all
UN member states who have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute and its amendments
and thus help achieve its full universality.

With the beginning of year 2015 the decade will have passed since the birth of the concept
of Responsibility to Protect. Such anniversary calls for an advancement in our commitments.

Far from being completed, our efforts to achieve the full implementation of Responsibility to
Protect must progress to a higher level. Slovakia believes that the time has come for
Responsibility to Protect to become one of the main concepts in the agenda of the General
Assembly