Only the delivered speech
Check against delivery

68th session of the General Assembly
plenary

Informal interactive dialogue on the report of the Secretary
General on the responsibility to protect
Informal interactive dialogue on the postponement of the SecretaryGeneral on the responsability to protect
New York, September 8, 2014
Declaration by Switzerland

Mister President,
Switzerland congratulates Adama Dieng and Jennifer Welsh, special advisers for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect, to have provided a very useful report that focuses on the
second pillar of the responsibility to protect.

Recent events, such as those taking place in South Sudan, the Central African Republic,
Syria or Iraq, tragically remind the international community is far from
successfully implement the principles and standards it has developed so far. They we
incentives to work harder and develop more effective synergies between the mechanisms and
existing to prevent mass atrocities initiatives. We must anticipate at all levels: understanding, decision and action.

Switzerland has been working since 2008 in partnership with several countries in order to strengthen national and regional political commitment to the prevention of atrocities. After four forums
regional on the prevention of genocide, the participating States have found that if efforts
were indeed accomplished successfully at national and regional levels, it is still necessary to strengthen these efforts and consolidate support among peers regionally. The launch in 2013, on the initiative of a group of countries, the Global Alliance Against Mass Atrocity Crimes
(GAAMAC) to prevent mass atrocities (war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and ethnic cleansing), marks a decisive step in this direction. The GAAMAC supports
countries in developing preventive strategies against these crimes and serves as a platform
exchange and sharing of knowledge and best practices. This initiative is an excellent example
implementation of the first two pillars.

Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations
633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
Phone. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.ch/missny

In this perspective, the report of the special advisers to prevent genocide and to
responsibility to protect highlights several key elements: national ownership, commitment
mutual, commitment to do no harm, establishing prevention as a priority and adoption
of flexible approaches. It also underlines the essential elements of prevention work, which
include:
- the promotion and protection of the rights of cultural, ethnic, national, linguistic and religious;
- a professional and accountable security sector;
- impartial institutions to oversee the political transition and build confidence
civic;
- judicial institutions and protection of independent human rights;
- the ability to assess risk and to respond early on there;
- local capacity to resolve conflicts;
- the ability of the media to counter hate speech and harmful;
- the ability to practice effective and legitimate transitional justice.

It is essential to support the development of national prevention policies and architectures. As the report says, if well designed and implemented coherently, assistance
International under the second pillar can strengthen efforts that States are already doing
to protect their populations against atrocities.

The report cites several important initiatives and mechanisms such as national human rights, the Council of Human Rights and its mechanisms such as review
UPR, the initiative "Rights First" (Rights Up Front), international networks
and atrocities prevention and regional early warning systems. These mechanisms are
useful tools. Switzerland calls on the international community to better make use so they
can be mutually reinforcing and supports in that the recommendations contained in the
report.

In 2015, we will celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Final Document of the 2005 World Summit The
Switzerland invites the Office of Special Representatives for the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect to write on this occasion, a report showing the efforts made by States
national and regional levels. The report could develop some best practices and
lessons to draw national policies and architectures including the promotion and protection of the rule of law and human rights.

Such a report would be a valuable and constructive contribution as well as a vibrant testimony of
efforts already made by the States decided to assume their responsibilities independently with
the support of the international community. It would mark a decisive step in this company
lengthy.

Mission permanente de la Suisse auprès des Nations Unies
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations
633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
Tél. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.ch/missny

Unofficial translation
Mr. President,
Switzerland congratulates Adama Dieng and Jennifer Welsh, Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect for the very useful and timely report which focuses on
the second pillar of the Responsibility to Protect.

Recent situations, such as South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Syria or Iraq, are tragic examples recalling that the international Community is far away from having succeeded in implementing the
norms and standards that the International Community has developed so far. This reminds us that we
need to work further and develop better synergies among all existing mechanisms and initiatives to
prevent mass atrocities. Early understanding, Early deciding, Early acting are key for prevention to be
effective. This is valid for each pillar.

Switzerland has been partnering with several states since 2008, with the view to strengthen national
and regional political engagement for the prevention of atrocities. After the realization of four regional
fora on the prevention of genocide, participating states came to the conclusion that national and regional efforts are indeed taking place and some success can be celebrated. Nevertheless, these efforts shall be reinforced where they take place and regional peer to peer support could be strengthened. The launch, in 2013, of the Global Action Against Mass Atrocity Crimes, GAAMAC, a state-led
initiative to prevent mass atrocity crimes (war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide, and ethnic
cleansing) is an important step in this direction; GAAMAC focuses on prevention at the national and
regional level and supports states engaged in preventing mass atrocity crimes who are considering
developing preventive strategies. GAAMAC serves as a platform for exchange and dissemination of
learning and good practices. This is an excellent example of Pillar I and II initiatives.

For this to happen, the report of the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect is insisting on several crucial elements: national ownership, mutual commitment,
Do no harm, prevention as a priority and flexible approaches. It further underlines crucial components
of the prevention architecture, such as
-

Promoting and protecting the rights of cultural, ethnic, national, linguistic and religious minorities
A professional and accountable security sector
Impartial institutions for overseeing political transitions and enhancing civic trust
Independent judicial and human rights institutions
Capacity to assess risk and mobilize early response
Local capacity to resolve conflicts
Media capacity to counteract prejudice and hate speech
Capacity for effective and legitimate transitional justice

It is crucial to support the emergence of national policies and architectures of prevention. As this report states, “If properly conceived and consistently executed, international assistance as part of Pillar
II can reinforce the efforts that States are already making to protect their populations from atrocity
crimes”.

Mission permanente de la Suisse auprès des Nations Unies
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations
633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
Tél. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.ch/missny

In this regard, a series of important mechanism and initiatives are quoted in this report, such as National Human Rights Institutions, Human Rights Council and its mechanism such as the UPR, the
“Rights up Front” initiative, international and regional networks for the prevention of atrocities and early
warning systems. These mechanisms are useful tools. Switzerland calls for these efforts to be developed in a spirit of mutual reinforcement and to contribute to a constructive complementarity among all
these initiatives and actors involved.

In 2015, we will celebrate the 10 year anniversary of the 2005 World Summit Outcome; Switzerland
would welcome the Office of the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect to realize a report illustrating the efforts developed by states at the national and regional levels. This report could develop some best practices and lessons to be learned regarding national architectures and policies and analyze the different components of such architectures notably
the promotion and protection of rule of law and human rights.

Such a report would be a very valuable and constructive contribution, a vibrant testimony regarding
existing efforts realized by states, involved and willing to take their responsibility seriously, alone and
with the support of the International Community. This could definitively represent an important milestone in this long term endeavor.

Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations
Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the United Nations
633 Third Avenue, 29th floor, New York, NY 10017-6706
Phone. +1 212 286 1540, Fax +1 212 286 1555, www.dfae.admin.ch/missny