URUGUAY
INTERVENTION OF THE
Sr AMBASSADOR GONZALO Koncke
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE URUGUAY
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
'Responsibility to protect'
INTERACTIVE DEBATE -
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
NEW YORK, SEPTEMBER 8, 2014
The Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
UN Plaza Suite 866 * 322 * New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 752 8240 * Fax: (212) 593 0935 * int uruguayGQun Mr. President,
The Delegation of Uruguay wishes to congratulate you for convening this debate and to the Secretary-General
the report presentedMy country is associated with the intervention by Rwanda on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to ProtectMr. President,
Focus set on the sixth report of the Secretary General in compliance with
collective responsibilities for international assistance is highly relevant and
which it allows to highlight a key aspect of the concept of responsibility to protect
It tends to receive less attention than the possibility of using coercive measures, such as the
reassertion of national sovereignty that comes from the responsibility of each State
protect its population and the role of the international community to assist scope
successfully that goal.

In this regard, the report assesses the partnerships that can encourage States to comply
its responsibility to protect, to assist them to believe capabilities
necessary to make them more resistant to the risk of heinous crimes, to increase their
protection capacity in situations of crisis and to help the United Nations to establish a
early warning capabilityMr. President,
My delegation believes that the focus on prevention is to be a
preferable alternative to the reaction. In this regard, I share the view of the Secretary-General
in his report indicates that international assistance can reinforce the efforts that
States make to protect their people from the heinous crimes and reduce the likelihood
a collective response under Pillar 111.

International assistance may be manifested primarily through encouraging States
to fulfill their responsibility to protect disseminating legal norms and
relevant policy commitments and reminding them of the importance of dialogue. second
Instead, you can express building national capacity to prevent heinous crimes
through training, institutional building and exchange of best practices. By
Finally, by assisting States to protect its population at
existing or emerging crisis by providing capacity or expertiseIn particular, I would like to make a brief reference in relation to the first form of
international assistance and, within it, which has to do with dialogue and diplomacy
preventive. The report mentions a case in which the UNASUR acted effectively in a
crisis situation and could mention other cases in which that organization
regional also proved its effectiveness. But, without going into casuistry, I understand important
highlight the role of regional and subregional organizations of which my country is part
in terms of its contribution to Latin America is currently an area of ​​peace and
security. Mr. President,
There are certain elements that greatly minimize the chances of occurrence
massive violations of human rights, and therefore these should be the subject of the
International cooperation.

It is worth mentioning, to respect, strengthening the rule of law and institutions
They have to do with the promotion and protection of Human Rights and Freedoms
Fundamental, in particular freedom of expression and association. An independent judiciary and
able to deal with complex cases of criminal responsibility, and failing that, the willingness to
enable timely international criminal jurisdiction, which would not only
address possible situations of impunity, but also as a deterrent to
prevent future atrocities. An example of this, in the case of the actions of national justice
and regional mechanisms, is what happened in my country and in several countries in the region with the
prosecution of crimes against humanity committed in the 70s.

For us "timely and decisive" response has more to do with prevention than
reaction. Then, the multilateral system must do everything in their power to avoid
reach the point of being necessary reactionMr. President,
We can not ignore that it is imperative to address cases in which this responsibility
Primary and prevention fail, when the State openly misinterprets the principle of
sovereignty and its corollary of nonintervention in contradiction with universal principles and
jus cogens norms regarding respect for human rights and freedoms
fundamental, as it verified unfortunately in many cases todayIn this regard, this focus on the second pillar also allows us to appreciate what the concept implies
that it has nothing to do with the use of force and dissociate Inaccurate partnerships with
notions that have nothing to do with the 2005 consensus, such as the pretext for the use
external force to serve other purposes other than to prevent or stop atrocities
mass, including regime changeFinally, it is important to consider the recommendation of the Secretary-General in his
last report as including the responsibility to protect in the Agenda Formal
general Assembly.

Mr. President,
I recall that in 2015 we will celebrate 10 years of the Final Document of the Summit
2005 world including in paragraphs 138 and 139 the reference to responsibility
To protect