ARMENIA
September 6, 2017
General Assembly informal interactive dialogue on the Report of the Secretary-General on
| responsibility to protect: Accountability for prevention
Statement by Ambassador Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Permanent Representative of Armenia to the
| United Nations
Mr President,
Thank you for convening the traditional informal dialogue on the responsibility to protect. I
express our profound appreciation to the Secretary General for his teport, for sharing his vision,
and for identifying steps to strengthen accountability for atrocity crimes,
The report begins saliently on the prioritisation of prevention. Indeed, the Secretary General has
placed prevention at the heart of his vision for the best and most effective action to avert crises,
conflicts, atrocities and massive crimes, This vision receives our absolute support.

At the same time, we have consistently emphasised the importance and priority of early
prevention, which entails sufficient capacity to detect, monitor and address early warning signs
of situations, which, if not addressed, may lead to deteriorations beyond control and all the way
to perpetration of massive crimes. Early prevention, in other words means early action. Such
observation once again leads to a point where prevention first of all implies legal and
institutional capacity, firmly based on political and moral responsibility to protect and promote
basic human rights and freedoms, civil and political, economic social and cultural rights for all
within the jurisdiction of states. We are reminded in the report that pillar one - the national level
represents the cornerstone of the responsibility to protect. We should also consistently recall that
flawed capacities to secure human tights for all create particular risks for identity-based
violations of rights, the ultimate manifestation of which, as we know all to well, is genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The responsibility to protect populations from atrocity
and rests firmly on the notion of responsibility to prevent. Indeed, prevention should be viewed
as a responsibility to be delivered first of all at a national level. In this context, we have noted
favourably and with interest the deliberations in the Teport concerning the notion of
accountability, as well as recommendations to strengthen accountability mechanisms at national We support the Secretary General’s view that accountability for atrocity crimes Prevention can
be strengthened by open reflection and inclusive dialogue on national experiences and that
persecution or reprisal, free media and academia contribute towards ensuring transparency and
accountability.

Mr President,
We were pleased to note the elaborate analysis in the report of the considerable normative and
institutional frameworks available within the United Nations in Support of atrocity preventionWe view these analyses first of all in the same context and through the same prism of early
situations, to gather and analyse early warning signs and to deliver it to the membership. The
respective recommendations in the Teport, concerning the role and functions of the available
human rights mechanisms, special procedures, treaty bodies and the UPR process deserve
utilisation, as they are indeed well placed to secure collaborative action aimed at early
prevention.

ensuing political divisions undermine the solid foundation on which the implementation should
rest. Therefore, patient yet resolute engagement of the membership in addressing the concerns
and disagreements remains an important objective. The Security Council and the General
Assembly could indeed provide necessary platform to this end. We have therefore received with
interest the respective observations in the teport about the role and functions of these two
principal organs of the United NationsMr President,
The report provides upsetting statistics about the status of ratifications and accessions to most
basic legal instruments relevant to the Tesponsibility to protect. Mr President, 2018 will mark 70
years of the adoption of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. Yet, seventy years later forty seven States, or quarter of the membership of the United
Nations delays accession to this core international instrument, As 4 country to have been
consistently advancing the prevention of genocide, including within the United Nations, Armenia
Proposes to use this occasion of the 70!" anniversary for launching a resolute UN-wide campaign
for awareness raising of the Convention and its universalization. The International Day of
Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of
this Crime on 9 December is a fitting occasion to set in motion such campaignFinally, Mr President, we reiterate our full Support to the Secretary General for his steadfast
promotion of the concept of prevention. We also reaffirm our deep appreciation, cooperation and
continued support to the Joint Office of the Special Advisers, to Mr Adama Dieng and Mr Ivan
Simonovic.

Armenia continues to exert resolute efforts in promoting consolidated international action against
the crime of genocide, including within the United Nations, and the Human Rights Council in
particular. Since 2015 Armenia has been regularly hosting a Global Forum Against the Crime of
Genocide, attended by political, public, religious, academic, civil society and media tepresentatives from all over the world. The 2018 Global Forum will focus on the role of
education and media in eliminating hatred, intolerance and xenophobia. We encourage all
member states and all relevant bodies and entities of the United Nations to bring their
participation