Statement delivered by China – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]

The Chinese delegation welcomes the convening of today’s meeting by the President of the
General Assembly. We have listened attentively to the statements of Secretary-General
Guterres and other participants. China has taken note of the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral on responsibility to protect. We hope today’s meeting will facilitate the continuous
exchange of between member states on this topic. We would like to make the following
comments.

First, the principal of the leadership of the countries concerned should be upheld in the process
of crisis response and promoting political solution. Governments bear primary responsibility over
protection of their own citizens. Therefore, the first thing first is to respect the role of the
governments concerned. The international community may provide constructive assistance
when necessary and take appropriate measures to correspond to the local situation. Emphasis
must be put on national capacity building at the same time the principles of the UN Charter
should be upheld. While the traditions in reality of the countries concerned must be respected
to avoid any negative impact on the domestic situation on the countries concerned.

Second, the outcome document of 2005 World Summit should be implemented
comprehensively. As stated in the document, the goal of responsibility to protect should be
strictly limited to the four atrocity crimes namely of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
the crimes against humanity. The specific wording is balanced in the document with each
representing a compromise reached by the countries in negotiations. The countries should not
expand this concept or interpret it at will, much less to distort or abuse it.

Third, countries should develop relevant policies and mechanisms to increase input in prevention
and settlement of conflicts and be cautious in resulting in force. When taking preventive actions,
the international community should first use such peaceful means as dialogue, negotiations and
good offices and take timely, reasonable and appropriate measures at the early stage of crisis to
solve the disputes through political means. Using coercive mandatory measures authorizing the
protection of civilians by force can only be the last resort when all peaceful means are exhausted.

Further, the prescriptions prescribed by the UN Charter must also be met. Any use of force by
the international community should be predicated on the endorsement by the Security Council
on a case by case basis and be strictly within the mandate authorized by the Council, with
specified implementation conditions and modalities so as to avoid potential acts of random
interpretation of even exceeding authorized mandate.

We hope that the discussion at the General Assembly will foster consensus instead of pushing
through controversial proposals. China is ready to work with international communities

comprehensively and implement the goals of the 2005 World Summit outcome document to
mold the UN in playing its important role in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and advancing
development with the view to bring peace, stability and development to the whole world