PERMANENT MISSION OF MEXICO
Statement delivered by Amb. Juan Sandoval Mendiolea, Deputy Permanent
Representative, during the Informal interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on the
Responsibility to Protect
New York, 6 of September, 2017
Check against delivery
Mr. President,
Mexico thanks you for convening this interactive dialogue and welcomes the first report of Secretary-
General Guterres on the responsibility to protect, the ninth report on this topic overall
We wish to acknowledge the efforts of the Secretary-General and his commitment to the prevention of
mass atrocities. We also welcome his five recommendations on steps Member States can take at the
national level, to strengthen accountability for prevention
Atrocious crimes are not spontaneous events, which is why prevention is fundamental. We share the
Secretary-General's view on the importance of early warning mechanisms at preventing atrocious crimes,
in particular through regional networks. A clear example of this is the valuable work of the Latin American
Network for the Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities, in which Mexico actively participates.

Mr. President,
!n order to prevent mass atrocities, it is essential that we emphasize the importance of the implementation
of Agenda 2030, and the need to incorporate a human rights perspective into these effortsWe advocate for the incorporation of a coherent and cross-cutting perspective of human rights in the
work of the United Nations, across the other two pillars of the UN: sustainable development and
international peace and security. In this sense, there is also need to strengthen mechanisms for dialogue
and cooperation between the General Assembly, the Security Council and other human rights
mechanisms and forums of the United Nations System, such as the Special Procedures of the Human
Rights Council. In this sense we support the Human Rights up Front initiative
A major obstacle that has limited the ability of the United Nations to respond early to massive human
rights violations is the lack of emphasis on the human rights pillar in the activities of the United Nations
System. We therefore welcome the recommendations made by the Secretary-General to take better
advantage of Universal Periodic Review Mechanism of the Human Rights Council to support the
prevention of heinous crimes.

The UPR provides a suitable space for the identification of risks and support for the development of
national protection capacities, including those related to the investigation and prosecution of international
crimes at the national level. It is a forum that has a mandate to strengthen capacities, unlike the
International Criminal Court, which should focus exclusively on its work to investigate and prosecute such
crimes in a complementary manner when the State is unwilling or unable to do so. Mr. President,
With regard to the important role of the Security Council, Mexico regrets the limitations imposed by the
veto on the principal role of the Security Council as guarantor of the maintenance of international peace
and security.

The veto is not a privilege, but a responsibility of the five permanent members. In that regard, we urge
countries that have not yet done so to join the 96 Member States in support of the initiative promoted by
Mexico and France,
Finally, we support the inclusion of an agenda item on prevention and R2P in the GA agenda in order to
facilitate a continuous, frank and inclusive dialogue. The GA plays a fundamental role in the prevention
of atrocious crimes and in the protection of the population. This dialogues have significantly contributed
to the reflection on the Responsibility to Protect, and have consolidated the recognition of the importance
of the theme for the work of the Organization. The preventive approach adopted by the Secretary-General
reflects thisThe formal inclusion of the topic in the agenda of this GA is timely and necessary and is consistent with
the Franco-Mexican initiative on restricting the use of the veto for atrocious crimes