Statement delivered by Nicaragua – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
We believe this is the best format for discussing this topic. We would therefore like to thank the
SG FOR his report. However, Nicaragua does not share all of the points of view in the report.

There is no consensus or acceptance by the international community on many of the questions
related to the Responsibility to Protect. R2P still causes significant doubts for many countries,
particularly small, developing countries because of the ambiguity of a number of elements
therein. These can easily be manipulated for political ends. Many of those who strongly advocate
for progress in this area, even without international consensus, do not promote with such
conviction the urgent need to resolve the fundamental causes of dreadful situations such as
underdevelopment and poverty, and they do not address the structural problems which lead to
the breaking out of conflicts which lead to extreme situations.

Moderator,
The Charter of the United Nations does not include any reference to a right of humanitarian
intervention or interference in internal state matters. The principles in the Charter are related to
sovereignty and not interference. Under no circumstances can it be stated as this report does,
that the Responsibility to Protect is a principle of international law. Since 2003, we have seen
states being invaded under the Responsibility to Protect. These are states which are now facing
total chaos, death and destruction. Since this terrible date of 2003, we have seen how
interventionism and violation of sovereignty have totally disintegrated these states and led to
great suffering amongst their people. The situation in some reaches of our planet is such that
there are millions of refugees and in some cases the establishment of Islamic State.

Moderator,
Nicaragua stands firm with the international community and the United Nations against
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. But at the same time, we
stress that the true danger of the Responsibility to Protect is that it could be manipulated by
covert interventionists who are trying to find different ways of justifying interference and the use
of force to destabilize and change legitimate governments. We would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate that Nicaragua has a firm commitment to our country and the international
community to continue strengthening stability, security and peace as indispensable conditions
for development. These are ideals of our country and freedom inherited of Sandino and they are
areas where we are always willing to lend our support to