UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, on the
conviction of Ratko Mladić for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
(New York, - 22 November 2017) The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama
Dieng, expressed satisfaction at today’s verdict by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) against Ratko Mladić, who was commander of the Main Staff of the
Army of Republika Srpska (VRS) during the 1992-1995 armed conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (BiH). Mr. Mladić has been found guilty of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes and sentenced to life imprisonment. “Today is an historic day. The verdict by the
ICTY against Ratko Mladić sends a clear message that there is no space for impunity and that
justice will prevail.”
Special Adviser Dieng paid homage to the victims of the crimes committed by Mr. Mladić,
honored their courage and perseverance in the pursuit of justice and expressed solidarity with
them. “This verdict renders justice to those who suffered as a result of the atrocity crimes
committed by Mr. Mladić. Nothing can erase the horrors of the past, but they can now have the
comfort of knowing that Mr. Mladić will face punishment appropriate to the crimes he
committed. This verdict provides victims with some measure of redress so that they can move
forward with their lives.”
At the same time, the Special Adviser stressed that criminal accountability “is not only about the
past but is also about the future. Accountability constitutes a critical component of prevention
and also an important step on the path to reconciliation. In a region where we are seeing denial of
some of the most heinous crimes committed during the armed conflict and the glorification of
war criminals, justice alone will not lead to reconciliation, but there can be no real reconciliation
without justice. I hope that this verdict, as well as past decisions by the ICTY, will encourage the
region to think about what happened, learn the lessons of the past and chart a future that fully
acknowledges those lessons.”
Special Adviser Dieng underlined that today’s verdict sends a message that reaches beyond the
region. “This verdict constitutes a warning to all those who commit or condone the commission
of atrocity crimes, as well as their incitement, or glorify the perpetrators. No matter how long it
takes, justice must prevail. Victims of Mr. Mladić’s crimes never gave up hope that he would be
brought to justice. Their perseverance is an example to us. Let us spare no effort to ensure that
every single victim can have access to impartial and independent justice.”
The Special Adviser praised the ICTY for carrying out its responsibilities independently and
impartially. As the ICTY concludes its work after issuing more than 160 indictments, the Special
Adviser called on the national courts of States in the former Yugoslavia to honor this legacy by
continuing to prosecute atrocity crimes. He also called on governments in the region and beyond
to fully support these efforts, including by abiding by their obligations under the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and by enacting the legislation that will

allow these crimes to be prosecuted nationally in a manner fully compliant with fair trial
standards.

“Today,” the Special Advisers said, “we stand with the victims, we honor their sacrifice and we
salute their courage. Tomorrow, we continue working so that there is no space for impunity and
so that justice can lead to true and long-lasting reconciliation.”

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Mario Buil-Merce, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/genocideprevention
Phone: +1 917-367-5001; Email: buil-merce@un.org.

Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and Ivan
Simonovic, United Nations Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in
northern Rakhine state, Myanmar

The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and the Special Adviser of
the Responsibility to Protect, Ivan Simonovic, call on the Government of Myanmar to take immediate action to
stop and address the commission of atrocity crimes that are reportedly taking place in northern Rakhine state.

The Special Advisers have been following the situation in northern Rakhine state for several years and have
warned that there was a risk that atrocity crimes could be committed there. Risk factors they identified included
very deeply rooted and long-standing discriminatory practices and policies against the Rohingya Muslims
population, a failure to stop acts of violence against that group and a failure to put in place conditions that
would support the peaceful coexistence of different communities in Rakhine state. “Despite warnings issued by
us and by many other officials, the Government of Myanmar has failed to meet its obligations under
international law and primary responsibility to protect the Rohingya population from atrocity crimes. The
international community has equally failed its responsibilities in this regard”, the Special Advisers stated.

The Special Advisers welcomed recommendations presented by United Nations Security Council Members
during an Arria formula meeting on Myanmar on 13 October and urged for an immediate end to the violence in
northern Rakhine state, full humanitarian access and the safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees to their
homes. In addition, they highlighted the importance of allowing the Human Rights Council independent
international fact-finding mission to access northern Rakhine state to ascertain the veracity of the facts.

A recent report by the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights describes vicious,
well-organised, coordinated and systematic attacks by Myanmar security forces, often in concert with armed
Rakhine Buddhist individuals against thousands of civilian Rohingya, committed with an intent to drive that
population out of Myanmar and prevent them from returning to their homes. These acts are reported to be in
response to attacks by militants on 25 August 2017 against Myanmar police posts and a regimental
headquarters. United Nations sources indicate that more than 530,000 Rohingya have fled to Bangladesh since
then. A few thousand Buddhist and Hindu civilians are also reported to be displaced while fleeing attacks by
militants. “Once again, our failure to stop atrocity crimes makes us complicit. When will we live up to our
countless promises of ‘never again’?” the Special Advisers asked. They emphasized that those implicated in
the commission of atrocity crimes must be held accountable, whatever their status.

During the discussions at the Security Council, the Special Advisers were encouraged by what seems to be a
consensus among the membership of the Council and the Government of Myanmar to implement the
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, headed by Kofi Annan. They acknowledged
as positive the appointment by the Myanmar Government of a ministerial committee to follow up on these
recommendations. However, the Special Advisers noted, “True commitment will come with implementation.

Any further delay in implementing the recommendations of the Advisory Commission, including on issues of
citizenship, will mean further violence and destabilization for the region.” They also urged the international
community to support the Myanmar Government in this regard.

Finally, the Special Advisors urged the Government of Myanmar to work towards a national identity in which all
populations of Myanmar, including those that identify themselves as Rohingya, feel part of. “Peace and
development in Myanmar will only come with unity and peaceful coexistence of all populations”, the Special
Advisers concluded.

Note: the expression “atrocity crimes” is used by the Special Advisers to refer to three crimes under
international law: genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Claudia Diaz, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917-367-2061; Email: diazc@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide, on his visit to the Central African Republic

1. (Bangui, 11 October 2017). The mission I undertook to the Central African Republic from 6 to
11 October, came following worrisome reports about the resurgence of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, including sexual violence, against a backdrop
of confrontations between armed groups and the manipulation of religion, ethnic sensibilities and
community origins observed from the south-east to the north-west of the country. I had the
opportunity to bring together the authorities, national actors, representatives of armed groups,
victims and international partners to initiate a dialogue on urgent, concerted and coordinated
steps to be taken to put an end to the violence, defuse the intercommunity tensions and alleviate
the suffering of the civilian population.

2. In Bria, which I visited with the Minister of Defence, two local parliamentarians and the Chair
of the National Committee for the Prevention of Criminal Atrocities, I was able to discuss with
key actors and to see, with regret and consternation, the systematic destruction of the homes of
civilians, many of whom were forced to flee. I received similar reports from Bangassou,
Mobaye, Alindao, Bocaranga, Nieme and Gambo about serious violations against the civilian
population, particularly women and children, for allegedly belonging to certain ethnic and/or
religious groups belonging and/or being affiliated with armed groups. It is time to condemn these
unacceptable manipulations that sow the seeds of division and wrongfully justify the horrors
reported to me by victims, the authorities, civil society representatives and religious and
community leaders.

3. I condemn in the strongest possible terms the manipulation and incitement to ethnic and
religious hatred instigated by armed groups and militias and accomplice politicians, with the aim
of establishing territorial control, mobilizing combatants or extending their predatory instincts to
private property and the country’s economic resources. I also condemn in the strongest possible
terms the attacks carried out against MINUSCA and humanitarian personnel in the performance
of their duties to support civilians. Any individual responsible for criminal atrocities or
incitement to commit such atrocities will sooner or later have to assume criminal responsibility
for their acts and face national or international justice. I therefore I encourage all efforts made
jointly by MINUSCA and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
cooperation with the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, to monitor and document messages of hate and incitement to violence, to identify their
perpetrators and instigators, and to ensure that their acts do not go unpunished.

4. All the victims made it clear to me that their wish was to live together in peace and harmony
with all the people of the Central African Republic. Christian, Muslim and Peuhl civilians are
taken hostage by armed groups. The people of Bria, Bangassou, Mobaye and Alindao are all
calling for their towns to once again be weapons-free, and they all aspire to return to their
respective communities.

5. I shared with President Touadera the concerns observed during the visit regarding the
seriousness and scope of the criminal atrocities committed in the hinterland with impunity by
armed groups. He believes that urgent steps must be taken to combat the attempts at ethnic or
religious division. He also reiterated to me his determination to continue the dialogue with the
armed groups, in order to ensure that they put down their weapons.

6. He is also convinced that violence must be condemned in no uncertain terms, regardless of its
source or of the victims or the perpetrators, in order to break the cycle of impunity. The
authorities, institutions, women’s groups and opinion leaders that I met also expressed the same
position to me.

7. I call on the Government of the Central African Republic and all the parties concerned to
commit resolutely to dialogue, in accordance with the consolidated road map of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, but without sacrificing
the need to strengthen the rule of law, to restore good governance and to combat impunity.

8. All the people I met said they were very hopeful, in the light of the restoration of State
authority, security sector reform and the DDR process, which all present opportunities for
strengthening the capacity to prevent criminal atrocities and protect the civilian population.

For media queries please contact:
Martine Nouma
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/
Phone: +1 212-963-0904; Email: nouma@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by Adama Dieng, Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and Ivan
Šimonović, Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, on the situation in Yemen

(New York, 19 September 2017) The Special Advisers to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect express concern at continued
allegations of grave violations and abuses of human rights law and violations of international
humanitarian law in the context of the on-going conflict in Yemen and voiced their support for
the call made by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to establish an
impartial, international mechanism to investigate the facts and the circumstances.

Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the conflict in Yemen. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has reported that since March 2015, there have been 13,920
verified civilian casualties, with 5,159 civilians killed and 8,761 injured - an average of more
than 110 civilians killed or injured per week. Coalition airstrikes continued to be the leading
cause of civilian casualties, and child casualties, in the conflict. These include only the casualties
recorded by reporting mechanisms; the true extent of casualties is almost certainly much higher.

The conflict has been characterised by a disturbing pattern of apparent attacks by all parties to
the conflict targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, including hospitals, schools, markets
and residential areas, without consideration for the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution.

The impact of the conflict has been exacerbated by disregard for international humanitarian law.

According to United Nations estimates, 17 million people are food insecure, including seven
million people on the brink of famine. The unprecedented rise in the cholera epidemic has
reached over 690,000 suspected cases with 2,090 associated deaths – the largest ever outbreak in
a single year.

“We call on the international community – and particularly the Security Council and Human
Rights Council – to take action to end the carnage and remedy this man-made crisis”.

“The international community has a moral and legal responsibility to support accountability in
Yemen by immediately establishing an impartial international mechanism to comprehensively
investigate allegations of serious abuses and violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law committed by all parties to the conflict, and their allied forces with a view to
ending impunity. The perpetrators must be brought to account. Justice must be served to the
victims. It is incumbent on the international community to halt the suffering that is being
inflicted on the Yemeni population”.

* *** *

For media queries please contact:
Peter Mutua, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963-1284; Email: mutuap@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release

Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide,
on the situation in Raqqah, Syrian Arab Republic
(New York, 30 August 2017) United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
Adama Dieng expressed deep concern at the deteriorating situation of civilians trapped in the
fighting in Raqqah.

“I am deeply disturbed by reports coming out of Raqqah of the horrendous situation faced by
civilians caught up in the offensive to retake the city from the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). The city is under intense bombardment by international counter-ISIL coalition
forces and the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). In addition, ISIL is reportedly using civilians as
human shields.”
Up to 25 000 civilians remain trapped in the parts of Raqqah still controlled by ISIL. In addition
to the terrible situation they face in the city, ISIL is reportedly killing those who try to escape,
and coalition forces are targeting boats on the Euphrates river, which had been one of the
remaining escape routes for civilians. At the same time, civilians in the areas south of the
Euphrates river are reportedly facing indiscriminate attacks by Syrian government forces and
their allies during military operations to retake the area.

“I urge all parties to adhere to their obligations under international human rights and
international humanitarian law, in particular their responsibility to take all possible measures to
protect civilians and civilian infrastructure and to ensure that all military action, including
airstrikes, are proportionate and comply with international law. The legitimate aim of retaking
Raqqah must not be achieved at such a high cost to civilians” the Special Advisor said.

The Special Advisor reiterated calls for a humanitarian pause to spare civilian lives. “As the
offensive to retake Raqqah reaches its final stages, the fighting is likely to intensify, as will the
risks faced by civilians still trapped in the city. I urge all parties and the international community
as a whole to ensure the protection of civilians trapped in Raqqah and to take all possible steps to
allow them to leave safely.”

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Maria Westergren, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 212 963-6241; Email: maria.westergren@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide, on his visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(Kinshasa, 24 June 2017) I decided to come to the Democratic Republic of the Congo this week
in response to alarming reports of an unprecedented deterioration in the security and human
rights situation in the three Kasai provinces and increased intercommunal tensions in the east of
the country, in particular in North Kivu province. My objective was to meet with the local
inhabitants, political leaders and civil society to initiate a dialogue on urgent measures to be
taken to end the violence, ease intercommunal tensions and relieve the suffering of civilians.

I went to Tshikapa and Kananga, where I met with the provincial authorities, civil society
representatives and many victims of the violence. In Kinshasa, I had the opportunity to talk to
several Government ministers, the Prime Minister, the national judicial, civil and military
authorities, and civil society representatives and parliamentarians from the provinces of Kasai
and North Kivu.

Unfortunately, my visit to the Kasai region confirmed my concerns. The extent of the
atrocities, destruction and suffering inflicted on the civilian population by militias belonging to
the Kamwina Nsapu movement, the national security forces and so-called self-defence groups,
whose activities are ethnically motivated or aimed at settling scores, is quite frankly sickening. I
was particularly moved by the accounts of the victims and their families, who described what
they had experienced: the beheading of members of their families and representatives of the
State, multiple summary executions, including of women and children, and the plundering of
their possessions. I was told that entire villages, as well as public buildings, had been burnt down
by members of Kamwina Nsapu militias but that, regrettably, in certain areas, the security forces
and other militias had been responsible for twice as much destruction. Children seem to be the
victims most affected by this violence. Children are recruited to be used as human shields or as
soldiers, and then become the primary targets of military operations.

The crisis in Kasai also has a humanitarian dimension. There are more than 1.2 million
displaced persons in the Greater Kasai region, and 30,000 refugees have entered Angola. The
destruction of schools puts the future of an entire generation at risk. This violence must be
stopped as a matter of urgency. There is no military solution to this conflict. The violence
unleashed by the Kamwina Nsapu is intolerable, and credible and systematic prosecutions should
be brought in response to the movement’s crimes. The scorched-earth policy practised by certain
units of the armed forces in several territories in the region, the disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force against the civilian population and the mobilization and arming of
auxiliary militias, in particular those based on ethnic lines, are equally unacceptable, and their
leaders should face the full force of the law. Combating impunity is essential in order to effectively
prevent new atrocities.

The Government bears the primary responsibility for protecting its populations. I have
presented my conclusions to His Excellency Prime Minister Bruno Tshibala and am encouraged

at his willingness to share them. It is imperative to immediately reduce the militarization of the
Government’s response and to prioritize instead a dialogue with all parties to the conflict in order
to enable humanitarian access, free the children mobilized by militias, facilitate a civil
disarmament programme and move towards the non-violent resolution of the conflict.

I encourage the Government, as I did in Tanganyika, to enhance the capacity of the
national police force to restore the civil authority of the State and prevent the excessive use of
force. Today I welcome the efforts of the provincial authorities and the Ministry of the Interior to
establish a consultation and reconciliation framework with traditional leaders and to organize a
peace and reconciliation forum with a view to bringing about the peaceful resolution of the local
conflicts and the tensions affecting the region, which were the root cause of the Kamwina Nsapu
revolt. I encourage them to pursue those efforts through transparent consultations and close
partnership with civil society.

I call on the Military Prosecutor’s Department, which has already initiated legal
proceedings against the security forces, to significantly increase its efforts and, if necessary, to
make an urgent appeal for regional and international support to resolutely prosecute the crimes
committed by militias and the defence and security forces. Its action should be at the centre of
efforts to prevent renewed violence, resolve the crisis and bring about healing in order to restore
civilian confidence in the Government and its institutions. I stand ready to help mobilize the
resources aimed at supporting such efforts.

I have also asked the Minister of the Interior to publicly condemn the formation and
mobilization of self-defence groups and militias by politicians throughout the country and to
have police investigations carried out to enable the Office of the Attorney-General of the
Republic to undertake the necessary prosecutions. On the eve of an electoral process that
promises to be difficult, prosecuting politicians who mobilize armed groups or incite their
communities to hatred is part of a violence-prevention policy essential to the stability of the
country.

These dangerous practices, which severely affect North Kivu and other provinces, must
be stopped immediately. The Government, the provincial authorities and the entire political class
of North Kivu have an urgent responsibility to prevent a new outbreak of intercommunal
violence in the province, the dissemination of hate speech in the media and on social networks
and the forced displacement of people. The Minister of Human Rights and I have agreed that I
will support the swift development of appropriate legislation to punish hate speech that
constitutes incitement to violence and discrimination in the country. At this point, I would like to
commend the efforts that have been made, and the progress that has been achieved, in the area of
combating sexual violence and the recruitment of children by the Personal Representative of the
Head of State and the justice system of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I encourage them
to actively continue those efforts.

Now that voter registration has begun, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is once
again at a critical juncture in its history. It is up to all political leaders, whether they are part of
the Government or the opposition, to ensure that a new crisis does not arise in the coming
months. I will continue to follow the situation closely and will keep the Secretary-General up-to-

date. My Office stands ready to work with all Congolese to prevent such a scenario and to
support the transition towards the holding of free, non-violent and democratic elections.

* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Martine Nouma
Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/
Phone: +1 212-963-0904; Email: nouma@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, on the situation in South Sudan
[New York, 6 February 2017] The Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention
of Genocide, Adama Dieng, expressed grave concern at the continued level of violence in
several areas of South Sudan. “President Salva Kiir has made a commitment to end the violence
and bring about peace, yet we still see ongoing clashes, and the risk that mass atrocities will be
committed remains ever-present,” said the Special Adviser. The peace process has yet to be
accompanied by a complete cessation of hostilities, undermining the likelihood that the National
Dialogue proposed by the Government will be seen as credible.

More than 52,000 South Sudanese fled to Uganda in January alone, coming primarily from
areas in and around Yei, Morobo, Lainya and Kajo-Keji. Some 24,000 arrived between 25 and
31 January, of which 4,500 arrived in a single day, on 28 January. Many have given accounts of
the killing of civilians, destruction of homes, sexual violence, and looting of livestock and
property, and cite fear of arrest and torture.

The Special Adviser is particularly alarmed at the situation in Kajo-Keji, Central Equatoria,
(south of Juba), where civilians have fled in fear of violence en masse. The access of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission to and around Kajo-Keji has reportedly been restricted despite
the serious security situation, as peacekeepers were initially blocked from accessing the area.

The freedom of movement of residents has also reportedly been limited. Some have reportedly
been instructed to leave Kajo-Keji. Others who fled their homes and moved towards the border
area between South Sudan and Uganda were reportedly intercepted by government forces.

Those seeking refuge report using a number of informal border crossing points to enter Uganda,
as armed groups are preventing the use of major roads, forcing them to travel through the bush
often without access to food and water.

Various areas in the Equatorias, among other regions, have been similarly targeted, and some
20,000 people were displaced from Wau Shilluk in Upper Nile in the last week, following
violence that left many without emergency health care, safe drinking water, food and shelter.

In November 2016, the Special Adviser drew attention to the dire situation in Yei River State,
following his visit to Yei River town, where credible information suggested that a scorched
earth campaign was underway, targeting suspected opposition members and civilian
communities believed by authorities to be their supporters. He reported the expulsion of
farmers from their land, looting of property and burning of villages, as well as brutal violence
against civilians.

Despite extensive discussions in the United Nations Security Council in November and
December 2016 on a proposal to impose an arms embargo on South Sudan and increase targeted
sanctions, agreement was not reached on either proposal. In the meantime, weapons have

continued to flow into the country.

In the margins of the January 2017 African Union Summit in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and the United Nations in a
joint statement expressed their deep concerns over the continuing spread of fighting and risk of
inter-communal violence escalating into mass atrocities. “If South Sudan is to achieve peace,”
the Special Adviser affirmed, “all belligerents must urgently cease hostilities and invest in the
peace process to settle their differences, before the territorial fragmentation and destruction of
the social fabric of this young country become irreversible.”

For media queries please contact:
Taryn Lesser
Office on Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917 367 5254 Email: lesser@un.org.

UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE
For immediate release
Statement by Adama Dieng, United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
following OHCHR’s report on the situation in northern Rakhine State, Myanmar
(New York, 6 February 2017) The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Adama Dieng, stated that he was shocked and alarmed to read the accounts of serious
human rights violations being committed against Muslim Rohingya in northern Rakhine State by
Myanmar’s security forces, as set out in the report published on 3 February by the United
Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR). According to the
findings of the report, human rights violations committed by the security forces include mass
gang-rape, extra judicial killings – including of babies and young children - brutal beatings and
disappearances. These attacks have taken place in the context of an escalation of violence in
northern Rakhine State since border security posts were attacked by armed assailants in early
October 2016.

There have been allegations that security forces were committing serious human rights violations
against the civilian population of northern Rakhine State from the very beginning of the recent
escalation of violence. “I and many others have been urging the authorities to conduct an
independent and impartial investigation into these allegations. The investigation conducted by
OHCHR gives further credibility to those accounts and describes a level of dehumanization and
cruelty that is revolting, and unacceptable. This must stop right now!”
The Special Adviser welcomed the Government’s commitment to investigate the matter
immediately. The commission previously appointed by the Government to investigate allegations
of human rights violations in norther Rakhine state, which was led by Vice-President U Myint
Swe, reported just a few weeks ago that it had found no evidence, or insufficient evidence, of any
wrongdoing by Government forces.

“I am concerned that the Government Commission, which had unhindered access to the location
of the incidents, found nothing to substantiate the claims, while OHCHR, which was not given
access to the area, found an overwhelming number of testimonies and other forms of evidence
through interviews with refugees who had fled to a neighbouring country” stated the Special
Adviser. “The existing Commission is not a credible option to undertake the new investigation. I
urge that any investigation be conducted by a truly independent and impartial body that includes
international observers. If the Government wants the international community and regional
actors to believe in their willingness to resolve the matter, they must act responsibly and
demonstrate their sincerity.”
According to the Special Adviser, “There is no more time to wait. All of this is happening
against the background of very deeply rooted and long-standing discriminatory practices and
policies against the Rohingya Muslims and a failure to put in place conditions that would support
peaceful coexistence among the different communities in Rakhine State. If people are being
persecuted based on their identity and killed, tortured, raped and forcibly transferred in a
widespread or systematic manner, this could amount to crimes against humanity, and in fact be

the precursor of other egregious international crimes. The Government has a responsibility to
protect its populations against these atrocious and punishable acts.”
* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Claudia Diaz, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/
Phone: +1 917-367-2061; Email: diazc@un.org.

Note to Correspondents: Statement by Adama Dieng, UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and Ivan Simonovic, UN Special Adviser on the Responsib...



Welcome to the United Nations

United Nations
Secretary-General

Search

18 January 2018

New York

Note to Correspondents: Statement
by Adama Dieng, UN Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide and
Ivan Simonovic, UN Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect, on
the situation in Eastern Ghouta and
Idlib, Syrian Arab Republic
The United Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, and

the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect, Ivan Simonovic express concern at
the devastating impact of escalating hostilities in Eastern Ghouta and Idlib in Syria on
civilians.

Statements
Latest Statements

Notes to
correspondents
18 January
2018
Note to
Correspondents:
Remarks by United
Nations Deputy
Special Envoy for
Syria, Ramzy Ezzeldin
Ramzy, following
meeting with Syrian
Deputy Foreign
Minister Fayssal
Mekdad

Both Eastern Ghouta and Idlib are designated de-escalation areas under the Astana
process and should therefore be places where civilians should expect a minimum level
of safety. However, since mid-November 2017, the estimated 393,000 people in Eastern
Ghouta have been subjected to airstrikes, shelling and bombardment on an almost daily
basis by government forces and their allies. These people are living under extreme
conditions as a result of a siege of the area by the Syrian Government, with some facing
severe food shortages and malnutrition. The Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) has confirmed at least 85 civilian deaths in Eastern Ghouta
between 31 December 2017 and 10 January 2018, of whom at least 30 were children.

Rockets fired by armed opposition groups in Eastern Ghouta into residential areas of
Damascus have reportedly further aggravated the situation.  
In southern Idlib and northern rural Hama, there has been an escalation in fighting since
December 2017 between government forces and their allies, and the Hay’at Tahrir Al-

https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/note-correspondents/2018-01-18/note-correspondents-statement-adama-dieng-un-special[1/21/18, 7:32:15 PM]

Note to Correspondents: Statement by Adama Dieng, UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and Ivan Simonovic, UN Special Adviser on the Responsib...

Sham alliance of armed opposition groups that controls the majority of Idlib governorate.

The fighting has resulted in numerous civilian deaths and the displacement of more
than 200,000 civilians in recent weeks. On 8 December 2017, for example, airstrikes hit
an IDP camp in Khwin village, south of Idlib, killing three children and their mother,
according to OHCHR reports. On 17 December ten civilians, six women and four
children, were reportedly killed in Khan Shaykun in southern Idlib bordering Hama by
airstrikes and on 20 December 18 civilians, including seven women and five children,
were killed in Maar Shurin town, south of Idlib. At least four attacks on health care
facilities and two attacks on education facilities have also been reported between 3 and
10 January 2018.  
A continued escalation in hostilities will worsen the situation for civilians. An estimated
half of the estimated two million people in Idlib governate have taken refuge there after
fleeing or being relocated as a result of violence in other areas of the country, making
them even more vulnerable.

Attacks that are indiscriminate or directly target civilians or civilian objects are a
violation of fundamental principles of international humanitarian law. All actors involved
in the conflict in Syria have an obligation to ensure that these fundamental principles
are respected. The level of violence and suffering inflicted on the Syrian people after
almost seven years of conflict should not be tolerated. More than six million people
have been internally displaced by the conflict, many displaced multiple times, and more
than five million Syrians have sought refuge in other countries. It is estimated that more
than half of the country’s basic infrastructure is damaged or destroyed and over 13
million people are in need of humanitarian assistance.

“We cannot stand by silently in the face of indiscriminate violence and violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law. All the parties to the Syrian conflict,
as well as the international community, have a responsibility to protect civilians from
atrocity crimes. We urge all stakeholders, including the Security Council, to condemn
this violence, and we urge the parties to the conflict to ensure that basic principles of
humanitarian law are protected, in particular with regards to proportionality and
distinction.”
* *** *
For media queries please contact:
Maria Westergren, Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
http://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/
Phone: +1 212 963-6241; Email: maria.westergren@un.org

https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/note-correspondents/2018-01-18/note-correspondents-statement-adama-dieng-un-special[1/21/18, 7:32:15 PM]

Note to Correspondents: Statement by Adama Dieng, UN Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and Ivan Simonovic, UN Special Adviser on the Responsib...

United Nations
Secretary-General
On the Job

• Daily Schedule
• Appointment Process
• Role of the Secretary-General
• Former Secretaries-General
• Official Travels
The Team

• Deputy Secretary-General
• Senior Management Group
• Representatives & Envoys
• Messengers of Peace
Resources

• Coordinator for Multilingualism
• Public Disclosure
• Opinion pieces/Op-eds
• Photos
Quicklinks

• UN News
• Secretariat
• Department of Public Information
• Spokesperson's Office

Copyright

Terms of Use

Privacy Notice

Fraud Alert

FAQ

Contact

https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/note-correspondents/2018-01-18/note-correspondents-statement-adama-dieng-un-special[1/21/18, 7:32:15 PM]