Statement delivered by Paraguay – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]

Thank you very much Mr. Moderator,

The delegation of Paraguay is very pleased to be participating once again in this interactive
dialogue on R2P. The government of my country has a deep respect for international law and
particularly humanitarian and human rights law, and is aware of its obligations to respect, protect
and promote compliance with these laws.

We place great value upon the important contribution of the international community in this
dialogue. Paraguay has shown its great willingness to comply fully with the international rules
and laws aimed at protecting human rights. As proof of this, and regarding the emphasis in the
Secretary-General’s report on prevention at the national level, we would like to share with this
plenary the progress we made in this area.

Recently, in August 2017, our legislative powers approved a draft law on the implementation of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, which is currently being considered for an
eventual promulgation. This initiative will allow us to establish a cooperation and coordination
procedure for the ICC in order to ensure that cases and accountability can be ensured for atrocity
crimes under the Rome Statute.

I am also pleased to report that last month, amendments have been considered by our parliament,
and this includes the crimes of aggression. With this step, we have thus begun the process for our
accession to this instrument. Moreover, in 2015, in a parliamentary initiative, there was a proposal
to create a National Convention for the Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities with the goal
of establishing preventive policies establishing a system for early warning mass atrocity crimes.

This draft law is currently being debated in the Senate.

I would also like to say that Paraguay is already part of the Latin American Network for the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. This means that on a regional and national level, we
promote activities moving towards the eradication of the roots causes that could result into crimes
against humanity and against our people.

Paraguay is currently a member of the Human Rights Council and support resolutions aimed at
increasing accountability and at ensuring that crimes are not repeated. This is in line with efforts
towards R2P. Finally, my country has appointed a R2P Focal Point which is working very closely
with the Global Network. The government of the Republic of Paraguay believes it is fundamental
and place greatest possible importance on the protection of our civilian population against any
form of discrimination.

Our delegation trusts in the mechanisms of the UN to ensure that peacekeeping and international
security. We therefore call for further work with existing resources and for continuing dialogue
with all relevant parties