Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the Philippines

9th Annual Interactive Dialogue on the Report of the Secretary-General
on the Responsibility to Protect
Conference Room 4, UNHQ, 06 September 2017, 10am

Mr President, Excellencies, Colleagues,

A dozen years since the 2005 World Summit, the international community affirms that
States have the primary responsibility to protect their own people from crimes against each
other, individual and organized, and in particular from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity - in too many cases abetted by authorities or sponsored by the
state. The protection of their own populations is the first duty of states, the very basis for their
legitimacy. This is the rule of law and not of men.

We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General, and support his call for greater
synergy among the three UN pillars of human rights, peace and security, particularly from
crimes against its own population, so as to enable the third pillar of development.

The constitution of the Philippines values the dignity of every human person and
protects the most vulnerable—women and children, the poor, easiest and oftenest the victims
of mass atrocity crimes. The rich always have the airport from which to take flight.

Mr. President, the Philippines supports the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms
for accountability. In the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly
SDG 16, all relevant actors should focus on cooperation in employing the full range of
diplomatic, humanitarian, and developmental measures to build the resilience of all countries
in discharging their responsibility to protect their populations - not least from the states
themselves, and from organized crime which has in some cases attained the capabilities of
states,

Toward this goal, we need to continuously strengthen national institutions for good
governance, reform democratic electoral processes to prevent the capture of government
units by violent political groups and mass movements, religious and political intolerance, and
by organized crime; professionalize the security forces to protect and not prey on its citizens,

1 encourage free and independent media watchdogs over the state’s responsibilities, invest in
basic education and instill values opposed to extremism and promoting pluralism, and
address the use of social media and new communications technologies by perpetrators of
atrocity crime.

Mr. President, the Charter of the United Nations provides the ways and means of
fulfilling our collective duty to prevent atrocity crimes. The challenge for R2P is to balance the
consistency and predictability of the rule of law, with the uniqueness of each case -
sometimes states sweep with dirty brooms before they can get new ones, and weighing the
factors in them; but in every case acknowledging universal norms of right and wrong. Our
assessment of each possible case must be impartial and evidence-based, free from political
interference, publicity seeking, and double standards. This would require the continuous
evaluation of anachronistic working methods, an excessive reliance for information on
involved groups with their own agenda, and including the selective use of the veto by the
Security Council P5 in possible R2P situations.

Mr. President, the Philippines remains committed to a transparent, fair, and effective
justice system, allowing for the prosecution of crimes under the Rome Statute. Our 2009 law
on Crimes against International Humanitarian Law, Genocide, and Other Crimes against
Humanity (Republic Act No. 9851), defines and penalizes UNDER DOMESTIC LAW “the
most serious crimes of concern to the international community as a whole.”

In closing, Mr. President, the Philippines continues to support the dialogue on R2P in
the General Assembly as the appropriate forum