Statement delivered by Qatar – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Thank you Sir,
Thank you for having convene this dialogue, which is of utmost importance. We align ourselves
with the statement delivered by the Group of Friends of R2P. Twelve years have elapsed since the
adoption of the Outcome Document of the 2005 World Summit when member states announced
their commitment to the R2P. This was a critical turning point in the history of our organization
and of the international community to protect citizens of our countries against atrocitiesThis is also a reflection of both the letter and the spirit of the UN Charter. There the international
community announced its commitment to the respect for human rights and human dignity. We
studied History and we drew lessons from it. We know that the overwriting legal principles take
time to take root in international mind and international consciousness.

We align ourselves with all Secretary-General’s initiatives to make progress towards protection
and prevention. It is important to protect civilians. However, to that end, it is important for R2P
to be inscribed on the General Assembly agenda. This is critical to avoid violations of human rights
and to make progress with respect to the recommendations, which were set forth in the 2005
World Summit Outcome DocumentQatar believes in the importance of R2P. We appointed a high representative within our
government to achieve this critical goal. We further support initiatives for veto restraint at the
Security Council when criminal atrocities are under consideration at the international level. In
advancing R2P, the state of Qatar, in January 2017, hosted an international conference on R2P to
address this matter and to delve into issues of violent extremism. In April 2017, we also hosted
the 7th annual meeting of Global Network of R2P Focal Points. Lastly, Sir, our hope is that in the
forthcoming months and years, we will be able to tackle the R2P as part of the General Assembly
agenda. This will be critical to achieve our collective goal