Statement by Ambassador Hahn Choonghee
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea
to the United Nations
General Assembly informal interactive dialogue on the Report
of the Secretary General on the Responsibility to Protect: The
responsibility to protect and accountability for prevention
6 September 2017
New York
Mr. Moderator,
At the outset, I would like to express my appreciation to the
President of the General Assembly for convening this year’s
informal interactive dialogue on the Responsibility to ProtectI also thank the Secretary-General for his personal commitment
and conviction to this principle and welcome his first report on the
responsibility to protect with a focus on prevention. As he
highlighted in the report, prevention is the paradigm-shifting new
approach that closes the gap between commitment and reality, and
is the direction commonly underscored by the reviews on Peace
Operations, on the Peacebuilding Architecture, and on Women,
Peace and Security.

In this context, I would like to highlight three points with regard to
prevention of mass atrocity crimes, bearing in mind the
recommendations from the Secretary-General’s reportFirst, I fully agree with the Secretary-General that strengthening
accountability is one of the principal ways to prevent atrocity
crimes. We have to ensure that violators are held accountable for
their crimes through prosecution in national and international
1
criminal justice systems, including the International Criminal
Court. We must also stamp out impunity in every corner of the
world to help prevent future violations and a relapse into violenceSecond, we also have to make the most of existing mechanisms of
early warning and action to make atrocity prevention a practical
programme. As the Secretary-General’s report suggests, the
Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) can
help identify possible risks early and facilitate relevant actions by
national governments as well as the international community. We
need to pay attention to former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s
Human Rights Up Front initiative, too. This is aimed at bringing
the UN system together in a mutually supportive way to help
identify serious human rights violations at an early stage to prevent
mass atrocity crimes. Regional and sub-regional arrangements can
be another effective tool to help prevent atrocity crimes. These
include the Latin American Network on Genocide and Mass
Atrocity Prevention and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region.

Third, we need a more comprehensive and coordinated approach to
further mainstream the responsibility to protect across the entire
UN system, and to establish greater synergy among the three
pillars of the UNWe are well aware that the Security Council has a specific
responsibility to respond to risks in a timely and decisive manner,
but has sometimes failed to do. In this regard, my Government, as
a supporter of Code of Conduct by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency (ACT) Group and Political Declaration by
France and Mexico, is of the view that the use of the veto should
be limited in situations that require immediate action in response to
mass atrocities.

2
The General Assembly also can play a more prominent role in
advancing the responsibility to protect given that it creates space
for all Member States to proactively participate in discussions. In
this context, the Republic of Korea welcomes the recommendation
by the Secretary-General and supports the request by Australia and
Ghana for inclusion of an item dealing with atrocity crimes
prevention and the implementation of the responsibility to protect
in the General Assembly’s agendaAdditionally, the Republic of Korea feels that the Human Rights
Council needs to scale-up its engagement in the implementation of
the responsibility to protect, and hopes that the Special Advisers of
the Secretary-General on Prevention of Genocide and the
Responsibility to Protect can help further bridge New York and
Geneva in this regardMr. Moderator,
In closing, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the Republic of
Korea’s commitment to the responsibility to protect. I look forward
to continuing to work with other Member States with a view
towards helping to protect vulnerable people from acts that the
international community, as a whole, has condemned as the most
egregious crimes