Statement delivered by Saudi Arabia – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P,
6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Mr. Moderator,
I would like to thank you for facilitating this meeting and I would like to thank the president
of the GA for convening this informal dialogue. I also would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his annual report on implementing the responsibility to protect and
accountability for prevention.

The Secretary-General report this year focused on the accountability for prevention and has
touched upon the challenges faced to fulfill this responsibility to protect. We believe it is
necessary to agree on the conceptual framework before discussing any practical aspects.

Since the 2005 Summit, when member states collectively took an initial step together
committing to the concept of the responsibility to protect. We still see today a major gap
between the moral concept of the responsibility to protect and its relevant principles of
international law and the United Nations Charter, where legal accountability falls under
national and international obligations. We believe a major step towards accountability for
prevention should start with a collective effort in the direction of a comprehensive reform of
the United Nations Security Council. As the United Nations certainly has the necessary tool
to aid member states in maintaining international peace and security in the world. However,
they are sadly confined in the veto system and the restrictive membership of the Security
Council.

My country and other member states have repeatedly protested the Security Council
continued failure to adequately address the situation in the Middle East, specifically the
issue of the Palestinian and Arab occupied territories, an issue under Security Council
consideration for more than six decades. Not to mention the recent situation in Myanmar,
which is another example of where the Security Council falls short to protect in this case the
distressed Rohingya people. Although we acknowledge the imperfect system of the United
Nations, which is sometimes caused by either the lack of political will or selectivity and
double standards, we still believe we should focus our attention on utilizing all of its
available resources to maintain international peace and security.

Mr. Moderator,
In conclusion, we don’t question the importance of the noble concept of the responsibility
to protect, but the standards of the international law and the Charter of the United Nations
codified legal framework for the international cooperation in solving international issues of
an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character. As well as state obligations to
promote and protect human rights. Therefore, one can understand previous and current
raised skepticism pertaining the scope of the concept of the responsibility to protect and the
implementation thereof