Check against delivery
Statement by H.E. Darja Bavdaz Kuret,
Ambassador, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Slovenia
to the UN
at an informal interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on the Report
of the Secretary-General on the responsibility of protect
6 September 2017
Mr Chair,
| would like to thank the President of the General Assembly for convening this informal
interactive dialogue and the Secretary General for his report on "Implementing R2P:
Accountability for Prevention"Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by the European Union and with the
statement delivered on behalf of Group of Friends of the R2P. Due to time constraints
my intervention will be shortened but longer version will be made available.

We continue to support the work of the Secretary General and his Special Advisers
and welcome their efforts to improve the system-wide capacity of the UN to prevent
and respond to serious violations of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, especially those violations that may lead to mass atrocity crimesIn this vein we continue to stress the importance of the 'Rights up Front' initiative as an
important effort toward being better alert and effective early onWe agree that more effective prevention is needed in today's changing nature of
conflicts. Prevention and the protection of people are at the heart of the R2P concept.

Slovenia once again reaffirms its strong commitment to remain an advocate of R2P
and to the wider promotion and protection of human rights. We will continue to
contribute further the advancement of human rights in international human rights
forums also as an active member of the Human Rights Council and would in this
respect support the proposal that the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect brief the Human Rights Council more regularly on
situations that give rise to heightened risk of atrocity crimesSlovenia hosted this year already for the third time the European R2P Focal Points
Meeting and together with the Faculty of law the International Conference
"Responsibility to Protect in Theory and Practice". Participants in the Focal Points
Meeting discussed how to implement R2P more effectively and has among others,
endorsed several recommendations on how best to advance the implementation of
R2P.

Mr Chair,
In order to improve the ability of the international community to take timely and decisive
early action we support the ACT initiative and the French - Mexican initiative calling
upon the Permanent Members of the Security Council to voluntarily refrain from using
their veto in situations of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against humanityImportant aspect of preventing conflicts recurrence is ensuring accountability for all
R2P crimes and other serious abuses of human rights and international humanitarian law. Therefore we continue to express our firm support for the work of the International
Criminal Court as well as regional and state mechanisms to counter impunityDifferent views how to achieve this must not inhibit the determination to protect
population from R2P crimes in the future. Therefore we once again support the
inclusion of the R2P debate in the formal agenda of the United Nations General
Assembly to further develop our common understanding on how best to implement the
R2P in practice.

Mr Chair,
We, the Member States, hold the primary responsibility to protect our populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. But as we said it
last year in this debate we will say it again and again - the obligations go beyond thatWe have to do our utmost to prevent any such actions to occur again. We believe
policy approaches on strengthening the resilience of states and societies should be
strengthened