Confédération suisse to the United Nations
Confederazione Svizzera
Canfederaziun svizra
U Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft Permanent Mission of Switzerland
71° session of the United Nations General Assembly
Briefing
Informal interactive dialogue on the Responsibility to
Protect
New York, 6 September 2017
Statement by Switzerland
Mr. President,
Thank you for convening this Informal Interactive DialogueMy delegation would like to thank the Secretary-General for his Report on The Responsibility to
Protect: Accountability for Prevention, particularly for two reasons: Firstly, for using a highly
inclusive process for the preparation of this report, allowing us to provide written contributions as
well as to participate at the preparatory panels in New York and in Geneva. Secondly, we would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his choice to place a specific focus on the accountability and
prevention nexus. We fully share the Secretary-General's view that accountability for atrocity crimes
and the fight against impunity in general are amongst the most effective ways of Preventing their
recurrence. It is to contribute to operationalizing this nexus, that Switzerland has a thematic unit
focusing on transitional justice and prevention of atrocities within it foreign affairs ministry.

Mr. President,
When looking at the root causes of atrocity crimes, a careful analysis of the Human Rights
situation can be very useful. We encourage to further explore potential links between the existing
Human Rights instruments and mechanisms, such as the UPR, and the Security Council. Also,
as the Secretary-General’s Report usefully highlights, the UN Economic and Social Council also has
an important role to play in supporting atrocity prevention and strengthening accountability633 Third Avenue, 29th floor
New York, NY 10017
Phone: 1-212-286-1540, Fax: 1-212-286-1555
nyc.vertretung-un@eda.admin.ch,
www.eda.admin.ch/missny Prevention of atrocity crimes is essential to achieving the SDG; and on the other hand a successful
implementation of the 2030 Agenda will contribute to reduce the risk or atrocity crimes.

In our view, the establishment of effective national prevention architectures, even where the
potential for the occurrence of atrocity crimes is not immediate, is key to prevention. The Global
Action Against Mass Atrocity Crimes, an informal cooperation and exchange platform, aims at
supporting societies with the development of such national mechanisms and policiesOnce atrocity crimes are visibly imminent and where there is a real risk of these crimes being
committed, the Security Council of course has a unique role to play to respond in a timely and
appropriate manner. We therefore call on all Members of the United Nations to ensure that the
Council meets its responsibilities, noting in this context the crucial importance of the ACT Code of
Conduct on veto restraintThank you for placing atrocity prevention at the heart of your overall prevention agenda
212.

Mr. President,
My delegation believes that in order to close the gap between our commitment to the responsibility to
protect and the daily reality confronted by the populations, we must not only analyze and address
the root causes of atrocity crimes, but also prevent recurrence of such crimes by establishing
mechanisms to promote truth and justice and holding perpetrators accountable for the harm they
have caused