Statement delivered by Turkey – Informal Interactive Dialogue on R2P, 6 September 2017
[UNOFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTION FROM WEBCAST]
Thank you, Mr. Moderator.

At the outset, allow me to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive annual
report on the Responsibility to Protect. We’d also like to extend our thanks to your office Mr. Moderator, for
organizing informal panel discussions during the preparation of the report. We believe that this was a useful
exercise that availed a valuable opportunity to exchange ideas among the membership.

Mr. Moderator,
Responsibility to Protect is yet to be an established norm of international law. Its scope and application need
to be defined and developed. However, the fact that the international community is discussing the
implementation of this norm is encouraging. The implementation of R2P should seek to establish a delicate
balance between safeguarding the humanitarian concerns of the international community while respecting
the principle of national sovereignty. With this understanding, the legal definition of R2P should be based on
the consensus of the international community. The concerns of all UN Member States should be taken into
consideration. This task should not be carried out to reinterpret the established principles of international
law and the existing legal framework on the crime of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and
ethnic cleansing, but to find ways of implementing them in a consistent manner. We welcome the approach
of the Secretary-General’s report which underscores the important linkage between R2P and prevention.

With this understanding, Turkey attaches particular importance to preventive diplomacy, leads mediation
support efforts not only in the UN, but also through regional and bilateral initiatives in the wider geography
and works actively for the peaceful settlement of disputes. We also agree with the Secretary General that
ensuring accountability remains key in achieving progress on the prevention agenda.

Mr. Moderator,
We believe the norm of the Responsibility to Protect could be applied with the close collaboration of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. This context, Turkey hopes that the discussions on R2P, and its
application will help us to pave the way to restricting the veto power in the Security Council, on matters
related to the crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide. Moreover, the Responsibility to Protect
should not be restricted to those facing trouble in turbulent countries only. Populations escaping from these
crimes to neighboring countries should also be taken into consideration. Bearing in mind often times the
limited capabilities of neighboring countries, the economic burden of the refugees or asylum seekers should
not be left to their fate