Statement on behalf of The Group of Friends on the Responsibility to
Protect
at the special session of the Human Rights Council on the human
rights situation in Myanmar

Mr. President
This statement is delivered on behalf of Members of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect (R2P).

Mr. President,
We condemn the reports of ongoing gross violations of human rights and
abuses committed in Myanmar, in particular in Rakhine State, notably
against Rohingya and other minorities.

We are deeply concerned about the dire situation of Rohingya refugees who
fled to Bangladesh. More than 620,000 people – mostly Rohingya – have
fled across the border since 25 August to escape violence, bringing the total
number of Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh to more than 800,000. We
remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in Rakhine and
the lack of access for humanitarian and UN agencies. We call on the
government of Myanmar to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to populations in need.

We welcome the commitment of the government of Myanmar to implement
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State as well
as the setting up of the Union Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine State. We also recognize initial
steps that were taken by Myanmar regarding the return of refugees, by
signing the Arrangement on Return of Displaced Persons from Rakhine
State with Bangladesh.

The Myanmar State Counsellor’s expressed commitment to bringing
perpetrators of human rights violations and abuses and related criminal
acts to justice is a welcome step towards starting a process of
accountability. Those responsible for grave human rights violations and
abuses should be held accountable in accordance with international law.

We welcome the generous hospitality of Bangladesh and the strong
commitments made by the Government of Bangladesh to provide

temporary shelter, humanitarian assistance and protection to the refugees
and other forcibly displaced persons.

We call on the Myanmar government to fully uphold its primary
responsibility to protect its population, regardless of ethnicity, religion or
citizenship status, to restore safety and security for all people in Rakhine
State and to bring an immediate end to all violence.

As a necessary next step, a credible process should be established to enable
and ensure the safe, voluntary, and dignified return of all refugees to their
original places of residence. We encourage Myanmar to work with UNHCR
and other humanitarian partners to enable safe, dignified and voluntary
returns for Rohingya refugees, as well as informed and sustainable returns.

We also call on Myanmar to fully cooperate with the Special Rapporteur
and the independent international Fact-Finding Mission – established by
the Council - and allow them safe and unfettered access to all parts of
Myanmar.

As the international community recognizes the dire situation in Rakhine
State and the plight facing refugees who have fled to Bangladesh, this
Human Rights Council has a clear responsibility to encourage and help
Myanmar in ensuring that all its diverse populations – regardless of
ethnicity, religion or citizenship status – are fully protected from further
violence and human rights violations.

Supporters of the Statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of R2P
1. Netherlands / Co-chair
2. Rwanda / Co-chair
3. Botswana
4. Côte d’Ivoire
5. Ghana
6. Liberia
7. Mali
8. Morocco
9. Mozambique
10. Nigeria
11. Senegal
12. Sierra Leone
13. South Sudan
14. Tanzania
15. Bangladesh
16. Qatar
17. Republic of Korea
18. Argentina
19. Chile
20. Costa Rica
21. Guatemala
22. Peru
23. Mexico
24. Panama
25. Uruguay
26. Belgium
27. Bosnia-Herzegovina
28. Czech Republic
29. Denmark
30. Finland
31. France
32. Germany
33. Hungary
34. Italy
35. Liechtenstein
36. Luxembourg
37. Norway
38. Romania
39. Slovakia
40. Slovenia
41. Spain
42. Sweden
43. Switzerland
44. United Kingdom
45. Australia
46. New Zealand
47. Canada
48. United States.

HRC36 Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect Statement Item 2
Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General
12 September 2017
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect.

We thank the High Commissioner and his Office for their strong voice and
advocacy for the promotion and protection of human rights and we encourage
them to continue to mainstream RtoP in their work.

The protection of human rights and the prevention of human rights violations
contribute to the prevention of mass atrocity crimes. The United Nations
Human Rights Mechanisms are particularly well placed to contribute to that
objective as they are focused on improving the compliance of States with
international human rights obligations and commitments. By addressing
specific situations of concern, reviewing the obligations and commitments of
States, engaging with Member States on issues relating to their mandates, and
making recommendations for action, the Human Rights Mechanisms play an
important role in advancing preventive action, including as an early-warning
tool, in ways that can contribute to States’ efforts to advance their
responsibility to protect.

The Human Rights Council protects human rights, promotes prevention and
advances RtoP in at least three ways and in accordance with the Council’s
prevention mandate based on paragraph 5f of General Assembly Resolution
60/251; it provides technical assistance and capacity-building to help States
protect their populations, it encourages and enables States to address
widespread violations and abuses of human rights before they reach the level
of mass atrocities, and it authorises investigations when mass atrocities may
have been committed to report on them, prevent their recurrence and help
strengthen accountability. In this regard, we also welcome the Secretary-

General’s 9th annual report on Implementing the Responsibility to Protect:
Accountability for Prevention, which underscores that RtoP is a key element of
the Secretary-General’s prevention agenda.

The Universal Periodic Review could be a useful mechanism that provides an
opportunity for States to assess longer term mass atrocity risks and mobilise
support to mitigate them, including through the provision of technical
assistance and capacity building. As this year’s Secretary-General report on
RtoP notes, “Introducing an atrocity prevention lens to the UPR would help
ensure that underlying risks are identified early, facilitate remedial action by
national governments and promote international assistance”.

Mr. President,
The international community should assist States in protecting human rights
and promoting prevention, including exercising their responsibility to protect.

Several countries that have experienced mass atrocity crimes receive technical
assistance and capacity-building, including Cambodia, Yemen, the Central
African Republic and Sudan. To strengthen this aspect of the Council’s
preventive work, we should take into consideration the needs and concerns of
the State receiving assistance and be ready to offer long-term and sustainable
support.

Mr. President,
While the mechanisms of this Council serve important early warning functions,
when mass atrocities may occur or in their immediate aftermath, independent
investigations mandated by this Council shine a light on reports of crimes
allegedly perpetrated against populations by collecting evidence, identifying
potential perpetrators, and offering options to address the abuses. Among
others, mechanisms have been mandated for Syria, Burundi and Myanmar,
and we urge all relevant States to cooperate fully with the relevant
mechanisms.

Statement on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect at the
UN General Assembly
Informal Interactive Dialogue on the Responsibility
to Protect

New York, 6 September 2017

1

Mr. President,

I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of 49
Member States and the European Union, and co-chaired by the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Rwanda.

The Group thanks the President of the General Assembly for
convening this Informal Interactive Dialogue.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his Report on
Implementing the Responsibility to Protect: Accountability for
Prevention.

We welcome the fact that the report underscores that R2P is a
key element of the Secretary-General’s prevention agenda.

The Group of Friends shares the view that we must prioritize the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, not just in word but also in deed.

We also agree that legal, political and moral accountability is
critical in order to translate R2P into an agenda for individual and
collective action.

2

For our part, in addition to reaffirming our resounding
commitment to R2P as enshrined in paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the World Summit Outcome Document, we want to highlight a
number of points from the Secretary-General’s Report that we
consider are critical.

We firmly agree that the cornerstone of R2P is the primary
responsibility of States to protect their population from mass
atrocity crimes.

In this context, we welcome the issuance of the SecretaryGeneral’s five recommendations for domestic action, and take
this opportunity to encourage all Member States to conduct
periodic self-assessments to ascertain how national efforts to
prevent atrocity crimes can be strengthened.

We share the Secretary-General’s view that accountability for
mass atrocity crimes is among the most effective ways of
preventing their recurrence.

The Group of Friends of R2P stresses that the fight against
impunity and ensuring accountability for genocide, crimes against
humanity, and war crimes is strengthened through the
prosecution of these crimes in national and international criminal
justice systems.

3

In this respect, we underline the primary role of national judicial
systems and the importance of the progress of international
criminal justice in the past years.

Members of the Group of Friends of R2P have different positions
on the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; many
have joined, while others have chosen not to do so.

The Group of Friends supports holding accountable all those
responsible for mass atrocity crimes.

The Security Council has the authority to play a unique role in the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

It is in everyone’s interest to have a Security Council that
responds in a timely and appropriate manner where there is a
real risk of these crimes being committed.

We call on all Members of the Council to act in a manner to
support responding to and addressing the risk or commission of
mass atrocity crimes, noting in this context the support of many
Member States for the ACT Code of Conduct and the
French/Mexican initiative on veto restraint.

4

The Security Council must of course have the necessary
information in order to be able to act.

We encourage the Secretary-General to use his powers under
Article 99 of the Charter to bring to the attention of the Council
any risk or commission of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
or crimes against humanity that in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In this context, we also encourage all States to support the
Special Advisers on the Responsibility to Protect and the
Prevention of Genocide and their Joint Office, and welcome the
efforts of the Secretariat to contribute to R2P’s implementation
through the commitment to Human Rights up Front, and the
development of the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.

We encourage States to use this document in their prevention
efforts.

To translate early warning to early action, we must make use of
all tools at our disposal.

As the Secretary-General’s Report correctly highlights, the
Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review is also well
placed to support prevention efforts, and we welcome the
suggestions made in the Report as to how the UPR could be
better utilized.

5

The General Assembly of course also can play an important role,
not least when Security Council action is blocked, as
demonstrated by the GA’s establishment of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism (IIIM) for crimes
committed in Syria.

Indeed, the Group of Friends considers that the General
Assembly could, and should, be playing a more active role to
support States in their efforts to carry out their primary
responsibilities to protect populations from mass atrocity crimes.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome Document stressed the need
for the General Assembly to continue consideration of R2P.

We welcome the fact that the Secretary-General has
recommended the inclusion of an item on prevention and R2P in
the GA agenda in order to facilitate a continuous, frank and
inclusive dialogue.

We call on all Member States to support the request made by
Australia and Ghana for the inclusion of such an item in the
agenda of the Assembly for the 72nd Session.

6

Mr. President,
The first two sentences of the Secretary-General’s Report really
say it all: ‘There is a gap between our stated commitment to the
Responsibility to Protect and the daily reality confronted by
populations exposed to the risk of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

To close this gap, we must ensure that the responsibility to
Protect is implemented in practice.

This gap can, and must, be closed. The Group of Friends of R2P
is committed to working with all stakeholders to help make this
a reality.

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the SecretaryGeneral
9 March 2017
Mr. President,
I have the honor to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect.

As the High Commissioner’s Annual Report notes, 2016 saw many “significant and protracted
crises [and] civilian casualties in conflicts reach alarming levels, while deaths and suffering
from large-scale movements of people continued to rise”.

We believe that this Council can and should exert greater effort to protect populations from
mass atrocities by responding to early warning signs when they arise and preventing situations
from escalating. To do this, we welcome the vital work of the High Commissioner and his staff
and recognize their efforts in addressing violations and abuses of human rights before they
reach the level of a mass atrocity.

We also strongly welcome the new Secretary-General’s focus on creating a “culture of
prevention” and to his commitment to Human Rights Up Front. In the Secretary-General’s
words, at the current time, the international community spends “far more time and resources
responding to crises rather than preventing them”.

Mr. President,
Preventing genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing is the raison
d’etre of the Responsibility to Protect. Widespread violations and abuses of human rights can
lead to the commission of mass atrocities. By protecting populations from violations and abuses
of human rights, we lay the ground for their prevention on a larger scale. RtoP is focused on
prevention and provides member states and the international community with a toolkit of
preventive and protective measures.

In this regard, the OHCHR, UN treaty bodies and special procedures can be exceptionally wellsuited to help us identify mass atrocity risks. We encourage all of them to speak out responsibly
and credibly to allow this Council to take timely action. We call on States to cooperate fully
with Human Rights Council mechanisms established in view of preventing mass atrocities, and
contributing to accountability for serious human rights violations and abuses.

The High Commissioner and his Office first and foremost play a key role in alerting the world
to imminent dangers. We welcome the High Commissioner’s strong voice in this area and
encourage him to continue to draw attention to widespread violations and abuses of human
rights that could lead to the risk of mass atrocities when needed.

A useful tool for all Human Rights Council mechanisms is the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes, produced by the Office of the UN Special Advisers on Genocide Prevention

and RtoP. The Framework can help in monitoring and early warning of the risk factors, and
strengthen our prevention and protection. We encourage all Human Rights Council
mechanisms and governments to make use of the Framework.

Mr. President,
The information gathered on specific risks can help contribute to the prevention of mass
atrocities. In this regard, we also encourage the Office of the High Commissioner and Special
Procedures to continue to provide regular information in their annual reports presented to the
Human Rights Council and to the United Nations General Assembly to encourage better and
more timely preventive action, and continue to provide briefings within their mandate to the
United Nations Security Council. We have a common responsibility to protect – we must and
we can do better