Albania fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union (see A/72/PV.99). I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacityPromoting the responsibility to protect domestically
and internationally has been a long-standing policy
priority for Albania. That is why we have supported
the inclusion of the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity on the formal agenda of
the General Assembly at its seventy-second sessionWe welcome this first formal debate on responsibility
to protect since 2009, which we believe represents an
important opportunity for the States Members of the
United Nations to reaffirm their commitments made
at the 2005 World Summit regarding the responsibility
to protect. Albania also supports the inclusion of the
responsibility to protect as a standing item on the
Assembly’s agenda. In that regard, my country would
welcome the adoption of a resolution reaffirming the
commitment of Member States to the norm.

Reaffirming our commitment to the responsibility
to protect will never be enough. Prioritizing and
investing meaningfully in the prevention of genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity should increase in order to deal with the many
challenges that remain. In that connection, we would
like to emphasize the important role that the Human
Rights Council and human rights mechanisms such as
the Universal Periodic Review and special procedures
mandate holders can play in preventing and responding
to mass atrocity crimesI also want to emphasize that ensuring accountability
for mass atrocity crimes is one of the best ways to
prevent their recurrence. On 17 July we will mark the
twentieth anniversary of the International Criminal
Court. Albania fully supports the Court and considers
it a vital institutional development in the battle to end
impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. In that connection, I emphasize that States
have the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute crimes committed within their jurisdiction.

National accountability efforts should be encouraged
and supported, including by strengthening judicial
cooperation between States and at the regional levelWe also need a special focus on sexual and
gender-based violence, which is increasingly used as a
deliberate strategy by State and non-State perpetratorsWhen widespread or systematic, such acts may amount
to crimes against humanity, war crimes or genocide. It
is never too late to hold the perpetrators accountable,
achieve justice for the victims and thereby prevent
further abusesIn 2013, Albania appointed a national focal point for
the responsibility to protect and has actively participated
in the Global Network of R2P Focal Points, which
we consider a very solid platform for sharing lessons
learned and best practices for advancing and upholding
the responsibility to protect, as well as for highlighting
successful national and regional initiatives that have
contributed to the prevention of mass atrocity crimes.

We encourage Member States to appoint a national
focal point for the responsibility to protect and to build
their national and collective capacities to prevent mass
atrocity crimes. We also encourage them to support
national institutional capacities in implementing the
responsibility to protect in the light of specific situations
in the country, as well as for early preventionMr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela thanks the Secretary-General
for presenting his report (see A/72/PV.99) on “The
responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884). We confirm our position on the
treatment of this issue within the framework of the
General Assembly, in the belief that the concept
continues to raise serious differences and concerns
among States Members of the United Nations. That is
due mainly to the lack of definitions of its concept and
scope, which deepens divisions among the membership.

The concept has been the subject of severe criticism
and questioning by a significant number of countries,
including Venezuela, that continue to consider that it
runs counter to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
sovereign equality of States, as well as being in clear
contradiction of the principles of non-intervention in
the internal affairs of States, self-determination, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining from the
threat or use of force. Those postulates must be fully
observed if we are to maintain international peace
and securityOur reservations about the respnsibility to protect
are based on the consequences of the traumatic
experiences of various armed interventions and military
aggressions against peoples and countries designed
to promote the overthrow of Governments, causing
the destabilization and institutional dismantling of
States. The ambiguity and legal gaps in the concept’s
definition, together with its selective application, make
its applicability as a principle of international law
illegitimate.

Venezuela reiterates its firm commitment to the
importance of preventing crimes against humanity,
war, genocide and ethnic cleansing, and condemns
any practice aimed at the commission of those serious
crimes. However, we believe that their prevention must
be based on promoting dialogue and peaceful solutions
to conflicts, based on Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations, not on military interventions or acts
of aggression with disastrous consequences for the
peoples whose rights the aggressors claim to defendThis is therefore a matter of how we can contribute
to the effective implementation of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law.

For our country, the responsibility to protect our
citizens, including by promoting and respecting human
rights,belongs to the State, based on the exercise of its
sovereignty and political independence. We are aware
that this prerogative can at no point be used to commit
crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide or ethnic
cleansing. However, the concept of the responsibility
to protect cannot be equated with the principles of the
Charter of the United NationsVenezuela believes that important differences
persist within our Organization regarding the content
and scope of the concept of the responsibility to protectWe therefore call for discussion of it to be resumed in
an informal format, in order to build the necessary
consensus on its nature and scope. The inclusion of an
issue that has important political and legal implications
must derive from a transparent and inclusive debate
process resulting in a common position that reflects the
agreement of all Members. We hope that the views of
the sovereign States that make up the United Nations
are taken into account in order to foster the necessary
consensus on such a significant issue. We believe that
informal discussions continue to be a good forum to
exchange views and produce that consensus.

The differences we have seen today undermine the
agreement reached in this Organization in 2005, which
the General Assembly already broke in September 2017They threaten any possibility of reaching a consensus on
the nature and scope of the concept of the responsibility
to protect. We are aware of its negative implications
for the peaceful coexistence of nations by rendering
essential principles such as respect for sovereignty,
political independence and the self-determination
of peoples conditional and relativeThe report of the Secretary-General recommends
the implementation of a concept on which there is
no agreement. We are deeply concerned that the
intention is to promote the use of certain bodies of this
Organization to validate interventions under the guise
of the responsibility to protect, making it appear to be
a cross-cutting issue. The legitimacy of the proposed
actions must be based on a consensus, which, as we can
see, is far from being the case right nowFinally, Venezuela reiterates its willingness to
continue working on this issue in the informal dialogue
format that has been used since 2009. We believe that
formula will enable us to progress towards a common
base as we define the elements of the concept of the
responsibility to protect.