Australia was pleased to
partner with Ghana to propose this important debate,
the first General Assembly debate on the responsibility
to protect in this decade. In 2005, the world’s leaders
declared that we must never again react with indifference
in the face of mass atrocity crimes. Leaders agreed on
the three pillars of the responsibility to protect as the
guiding principles for preventing and responding to
such crimes. Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
aptly described the responsibility to protect as narrow
but deep. It is narrow, because it focuses on atrocity
crimes — genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity; and deep, as its implementation
is necessarily multidimensional, while requiring action
at the national, regional and international levels.

Although the collective commitment to the principle of
the responsibility to protect is strong, there remains a
significant gap between it and the daily reality for many
populations across the world. The implementation of
the responsibility to protect must be our focusAustralia thanks the Secretary-General for his
insightful remarks today and his report (A/72/884) on
the responsibility to protect, which includes concrete
and sound recommendations for its implementationWe agree with him that the implementation of the
responsibility to protect is an essential part of the pivot
to prevention in the United Nations system. Effective
prevention requires the participation of society as a
whole, from civil society to religious and community
leaders. It requires action by States at the domestic,
regional and international levels. We must do better at
identifying the early-warning signs of mass violence
and, critically, summon the political will for early
action. In Australia’s view, action at the regional level
is essential for the meaningful implementation of the
responsibility to protect.

In the Pacific region, the members of the Pacific
Islands Forum, including Australia, agreed to the
Biketawa declaration 18 years ago in Kiribati. That
important document recognizes the vulnerability
of all members to civil unrest and other threats to
their populations’ security. It articulates a common
commitment to resolving conflict through regional
cooperation. The declaration has served as the
springboard for regional assistance missions that have
successfully restored law and order, rebuilt national
institutions and supported economic growth. The
consent of, and partnership with, receiving States
were the prerequisite to those missions and critical to
their success, an example of the second pillar of the
responsibility to protect in action. After all, no one
country alone can meet the security challenges we face.

The horrors of the Second World War were fresh in
the minds of the drafters of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Charter they created endows the Security
Council with unique powers. The use of those powers
to protect populations from mass atrocities was central
to the drafters’ vision for the Organization. That is why
we joined 113 others in supporting the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct,
a commitment to refraining from vetoing Security
Council action in cases of mass atrocity. We also
encourage all States, but especially Security Council
members, to join Australia and the 95 other Member
States that support France and Mexico’s initiative on
veto restraint.

The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
diversity of tools that must necessarily be in the
responsibility-to-protect toolkit. We agree that existing
human rights mechanisms, such as the Universal Periodic
Review process, play an important role in advancing
the prevention of mass atrocities. Strengthening
accountability for atrocity crimes is another important
way that we can close the implementation gapAustralia firmly believes that holding to account those
responsible for serious international crimes, whether
at the domestic or international level, is critical for
inclusive and sustainable peace. Where perpetrators
commit atrocities with impunity and where justice fails
victims, the seeds of future mass violence are sownOur leaders saw a leading role for the General
Assembly in discussing the implementation of the
responsibility to protect. While the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council have invoked the
responsibility to protect in their discussions and actions,
the Assembly has remained mute. Australia believes
that the Assembly is an essential forum for inclusive,
comprehensive and regular discussions on how we can
better implement our common commitment to prevent
mass atrocities. We look forward to the dialogue today
on the responsibility to protect and its implementation.