The delegation of
Azerbaijan thanks the President for convening this first
formal debate on the responsibility to protect since
2009. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his most recent report on the subject, entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to
early action” (A/72/884).

Thirteen years ago, Member States made a
commitment to protecting their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. However, as noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the gap between that commitment and
the experience of vulnerable populations has grown.

Wars and armed conflicts continue to rage in many parts
of the world. The erosion of international humanitarian
law further increases human suffering, with women and
children paying the highest price in conflict situations.

Hate speech, incitement to hatred and xenophobia are
on the rise across the globe. The number of refugees
and internally displaced persons has already reached
a record level of 65 million. Forced displacement is
increasingly used as a method of war.

Member States must address the mismatch between
promises and action. First and foremost, the root
causes of armed conflict should be tackled to reverse
this negative trend. In that regard, the international
community should condemn any occupations of
Member States or acts of aggression committed against
them, and fully respect their sovereignty and territorial
integrity. All parties should respect international
humanitarian and human rights law, combat impunity,
enhance accountability and strengthen their capacity
and national ownership in protecting populations.

The primary responsibility to protect populations
from atrocity crimes rests with States. As underlined by
many speakers during these deliberations, prevention is
the most effective form of protection.

The early identification and tracking of atrocity
crime factors is crucial to that end. The promotion
of mutual tolerance and peaceful coexistence could
also be a very powerful tool in building resilience to

atrocity crimes. We also note that the Secretary-General
highlights inclusive and sustainable development as
the best form of prevention against all kinds of risks,
including the risk of atrocity crimes.

that

The World Summit Outcome document stipulates
[t]he international community, through the
United Nations, also has the responsibility to use
appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other
peaceful means, in accordance with Chapters VI and
VIII of the Charter, to help to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity” (resolution 60/1, para.

Regrettably, narrow political interests, double
standards and selectivity have prevailed, international
law is becoming ineffective and the credibility of
institutions such as the United Nations and regional
organizations is being eroded. Not all grave violations
of international and human rights law receive due
attention and a response at the international level. The
conspicuous silence in certain instances, particularly in
situations of military aggression and foreign occupation,
and total disregard of a number of Security Council
resolutions, serves to accentuate a deficiency that is
characteristic of the international community today.

Divergent views persist on the nature, scope
and application of the responsibility to protect. The
Secretary-General, in his statement, also referred
to fear and concerns among Member States about
the concept. We therefore need more discussion to
identify common ground and reach consensus on the
responsibility to protect.

It is critical to ensure that actions in fulfilling
the responsibility to protect are undertaken only in
conformity with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The responsibility
to protect should never be used to pursue political
objectives, intervene in the internal affairs of States or
undermine States’ sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence. Furthermore, this concept must
not be applied in a selective manner.

In conclusion, we look forward to further
discussions in order to bridge the differences on the
points of contention around the responsibility to protect.