This is the
first time since 2009 that the General Assembly is
holding a formal debate on the responsibility to protect,
and it is long overdue. Such a format allows us to
better articulate our ideas on an issue with outstanding
conceptual questions. Equally important, it allows for
interpretation in all official languages and for a webcast
and an official record to be produced, all of which are
crucial not only for transparency but also for us to
better understand one another’s concerns and identify
common ground.

Since 2005, the Assembly has adopted only one
resolution, of a procedural nature, on the responsibility
to protect (resolution 63/308). In the meantime, the

Security Council has adopted more than 70 resolutions
and 20 presidential statements that refer to it. As the most
democratic organ of the United Nations, the Assembly
should reclaim ownership and shape the debate on the
protection of populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

I thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on the responsibility to protect (A/72/884) and
take this opportunity to voice Brazil’s appreciation
for the work undertaken since the last formal debate
by all of the Special Advisers on the Responsibility
to Protect — Edward Luck, Jennifer Welsh and Ivan
Šimonović. Their work has always been marked
by respectful and constructive engagement with
all delegations.

To avoid conceptual doubts, we would have
preferred that the report of the Secretary-General refrain
from using broad and undefined expressions such as
“atrocities” as synonyms for the four responsibility-toprotect crimes. Genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity are indeed atrocious, but so
are other crimes not encompassed by the responsibility
to protect, such as aggression.

With a view to improving the method of
implementing the responsibility to protect, in 2011
Brazil circulated a concept note on responsibility while
protecting. In all interactive informal dialogues since
then, we have further deepened our suggestions in
that regard.

Prevention is always the best policy. As the
Secretary-General said, it costs far more to pick up the
pieces after crises than it does do prevent them. The
report includes recommendations for improving early
warning by developing a systematic and structured
approach so as to overcome the current fragmentation
of information-gathering and assessment. The proposed
reform of the peace and security pillar could be an
avenue for that.

But prevention should not be seen solely from a
short-term perspective — that is, focusing on situations
on the brink of collapse. It must also be addressed from
a structural perspective. Long-lasting peace requires
promoting sustainable development, ensuring food
security, eradicating poverty and reducing inequality. It
involves tackling marginalization, discrimination and
other legitimate grievances that may be at the root of
conflict. It also encompasses post-conflict scenarios to
avoid a relapse into violence.

Seen from that broader perspective, the
implementation of the first and second pillars of the
responsibility to protect has been limited by a lack
of adequate, predictable and sustainable funding.

It is disappointing, for instance, that peacebuilding
remains utterly underfunded and that the international
community is still short of meeting its official
development assistance target of 0.7 per cent of gross
domestic product.

Our collective responsibility does not need to translate
into collective security action in order to be effective.

We must value, pursue and exhaust all non-military
means available for the protection of civilians under
threat of violence. Preventive and responsive tools
should follow a sequential logic, meaning, above all,
that coercive measures and the use of military force
should always be our last option.

The implementation of the first and second pillars
involves little controversy, but the same cannot be said
of the third. We should engage in forward-looking
discussions aimed at finding solutions to misgivings
from the past. It is crucial to develop an understanding
of what force can and cannot accomplish. More often
than not, strategies based on a hasty resort to force
exacerbate the suffering of innocent people and lead
to negative humanitarian consequences that cause more
harm than good.

While Brazil is a strong advocate of the primacy
of prevention, we do not deny that military force
might be envisaged in exceptional circumstances,
but only in strict compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations. The protection of human rights and the
prevention of international crimes cannot be used as
an excuse to unilaterally resort to force. Our resolve to
stop such violations cannot make us turn a blind eye to
international law.

In circumstances when military action is
authorized by the Security Council or the General
Assembly, it should be judicious, proportionate and in
compliance with the mandate. It should be limited in its
legal, operational and temporal dimensions, and when
considering this exceptional measure we must demand
adequate reporting and the establishment of a panel of
experts to monitor its implementation.

There is a sense of frustration about the inability of
the Security Council to provide solutions to situations
where civilians are in danger. One aspect of the problem

lies in the Council’s composition and its methods of
work. Reforming the Security Council and expanding
both categories of its membership, has become an
overdue task for the Organization.

Another challenge in the implementation of the
responsibility to protect is ensuring that there are no
double standards. Civilians in one country are no less
deserving of protection than those in others, including
in illegally occupied territories. The current refugee
and migrant crisis also calls for a renewed commitment
to our responsibility to protect. It is inconsistent to
uphold a responsibility to protect civilians in situations
of conflict and turn one’s back on the very civilians
fleeing such scenarios when they knock on one’s door.