(spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, and the Secretariat for
organizing this meeting. I would also like to express
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(A/72/884) on the responsibility to protect and on the
prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity. I would like to address
the following points with regard to the subject of
today’s meetingThe delegation of Egypt reaffirms that the basic
responsibility for protecting nations from grave
crimes falls to Member States, and that the national
and international work to prevent those crimes must
be based on supporting national efforts to expose
and prevent such crimes by national law-enforcement
bodies in conflict and post-conflict situations. The
implementation of the concept of the responsibility to
protect is a basic responsibility of States. It is important
to ensure respect for the principles of international law,
particularly those of the sovereignty and equality of
States. In that regard, I would like to emphasize that
the role of the international community should be
limited to a complementary one helping States to fulfil
their commitments. International interventions should
be an exceptional measure of last resort, and should
be conducted in full compliance with the Charter of
the United Nations. We also stress the importance of
ensuring that the concept is not allowed to expand
during implementation.

Egypt would like to emphasize the importance of
respecting the hierarchy of the implementation of the
norm’s pillars. We cannot move from one pillar to another
until the possibilities of the first have been completely
exhausted. The first pillar is Member States’ inherent
responsibility for protecting their civilians from severe
violations. The second consists in the effort to use all
possible diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful
ways to protect people from atrocities before seeking
the international community’s assistance in adopting a
collective position that accords with the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII. In that regard,
we would like to reaffirm that as far as the responsibility
to protect is concerned, any international strategy must
have the broad support of Member States in order to
exclude any doubts about the impartiality of those
strategies or the possibility that they could be seen as
a way to interfere in a State’s internal affairs. We must
therefore avoid relying on initiatives or strategies that
do not enjoy consensus and that have been developed
outside intergovernmental frameworks, including the
Human Rights Up Front initiative and the Framework
of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes.

While we agree with the noble objectives on which
the concept of the responsibility to protect is based, and
remain committed to the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (resolution 60/1), including paragraphs 138
and 139, the problem is the concept’s ambiguity. Its
essence is still an expanded political concept, and it is
not yet a specifically designated legal concept, so that the
scope of its applicability is not yet defined. Considering
those basic political and legal gaps in the concept of the
responsibility to protect, we believe we still need more
time for dialogue and discussions in order to respond
to the concerns of all Member States and address
those gaps. We should establish a clear perception that
enjoys consensus. We cannot possibly begin to develop
a mechanism for implementing the responsibility to
protect before we have a clear and specific definition
of the concept itself. In that respect, and in line with
our belief in the importance of a dialogue on this issue,
Egypt has participated constructively and positively
in the meetings of the relevant informal interactive
dialogue of the General Assembly.

In conclusion, it is clear from all of this that we
still have a lot of work to do in order to clarify this
concept and ensure that it complies with the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law. We believe that this clarification is essential if we
are to include the responsibility to protect as an item
on the agenda of the General Assembly. We therefore
oppose its inclusion on the agenda without developing
and agreeing on a specific definition. In that respect,
we hope to continue the informal interactive dialogue
in order to close the legal and political gaps with
regard to the concept before including it on the agenda
of the General Assembly or taking any steps towards
its implementation.