I thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this debateFiji aligns its statement with that delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Kiribati on behalf of the
members of the Pacific Island Forum (see A/72/PV.99)We would like to add the following comments in our
national capacityWe would like to express our great appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his briefing (see A/72/
PV.99) and comprehensive report (A/72/884), whose
recommendations we commend and supportThis is our first time in the debate on the
responsibility to protect. Fiji adds its voice in favour
of including the responsibility to protect as a recurring
item on the General Assembly’s agenda. We have an
obligation to our communities, which look to the
United Nations to provide protection from crimes
against humanity and genocide. The obligation falls
to us to take appropriate measures to safeguard lives
and protect communities when their lives are at risk. It
falls to us to ensure that the international system acts
in time, proactively and decisively. We should therefore
provide a clear pathway with regard to the responsibility
to protect.

I want to stress the importance that national,
regional and global institutions have in protecting livesThe Human Rights Council is vital to the responsibility
to protect. Fiji recognizes that the Council needs to do
its job better, and we are therefore seeking membership
in the Council to pursue that agenda. It is a small but
important starting pointFiji is committed to the principle of the responsibility
to protect, a commitment we reaffirmed in the 1970s
when we began to deploy Fijian peacekeepers in very
difficult regions of the world. Although we have
lost lives in upholding the responsibility to protect
civilians, we have remained steadfast. We believe
that strengthening United Nations peacekeeping is a
fundamental part of the overall United Nations strategy
and toolkit for protecting people from mass atrocities
and prevent war crimes.

We agree with the finding of the Secretary-General
that accountability for atrocity prevention should
be considerably enhanced. Fiji looks forward to the
speedy appointment of a new Special Adviser to work
with all stakeholders in ensuring that the responsibility
to protect is a feature of peacekeeping training and
deployment. Peacekeeping, human rights and the
responsibility to protect are part of a continuum. The
Secretary-General’s initiative will ensure a greater
focus on strengthening that interrelationship. It will
both complement and help to reinforce the regional
efforts in the South Pacific through the Biketawa Plus
initiative, which some of my colleagues mentioned last
week. I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Australia and Ghana for their bold leadership in driving
the agenda and look forward to working with the
Assembly in forging a consensus on the responsibility
to protect as soon as possible.