Finland aligns itself with the
statements made earlier by the observer of the European
Union and by the representative of Qatar on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect
(see A/72/PV.99)We thank the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General for their statements today
(ibid.). Finland welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in his report, entitled “Responsibility
to protect: from early warning to early action”
(A/72/884). As the title suggests, translating early
warning into early action is crucial. The responsibility
to protect remains central to our common agenda for
preventing genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. We also thank Australia
and Ghana for their leadership in including the
responsibility to protect on the agenda of the General
Assembly this year.

Earlier this month, the Ministries of Foreign Affairs
of Finland and Mexico, in cooperation with the Global
Centre for the Responsibility to Protect, hosted the
eighth Annual Meeting of the Global Network of R2P
Focal Points in Helsinki. The meeting brought together
national focal points and other participants from more
than 40 countries and international organizations that
aim to promote the responsibility to protect and the
prevention of mass atrocity at the national, regional and
international levels. Among the invited participants
was the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama DiengThe Helsinki meeting provided an excellent
opportunity for the participants to exchange
experiences and best practices on how to integrate
responsibility-to-protect considerations into their daily
work at the national level and in foreign policy. The
meeting highlighted the role of mediation and noted
the twentieth anniversary of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We believe that it
was important in reaffirming that there are still forces
that believe strongly in the rule of law and the rulesbased international orderLastly, Finland remains a staunch supporter of the
ICC. We hope that the twentieth anniversary of the
Rome Statute will serve to highlight the value and the
results of the ICC. The goal of ending impunity for the
most serious international crimes is high on the agenda
of Finland’s foreign policy. We are very much justified
in discussing the role of the ICC during today’s meeting,
since support to the activities of the Court could also
act as a deterrent.