(spoke in French): First
of all, my delegation would like to congratulate the
President of the General Assembly on the initiative
to convene today’s debate on the responsibility to
protect. We would also like to congratulate Ghana and
Australia on their efforts to include the issue as part
of the formal agenda of the General Assembly. We
commend Secretary-General António Guterres on his
determination to make the issue an absolute priorityAs the Assembly knows, civilians account for the
vast majority of victims in armed conflicts marked by
ongoing and very serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Gabon is of the view that any attack
on civilians is a flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee
law. The responsibility to protect people and prevent
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity lies primarily with States, both in
times of peace and during war. That responsibility also
extends to protecting refugee camps. I also want to
take this opportunity to reiterate Gabon’s commitment
to international criminal justice and the fight against
impunity so as to ensure that those responsible for
serious crimes are held accountable for their actions
before competent national or international courts.

My country affirms its commitment to the standards
set by the responsibility to protect, particularly the
implementation of the three pillars — prevention,
encouraging the international community and
collective action in the case of a State’s failure. I take
this opportunity to commend the Secretary-General on
his personal commitment to preventing conflict in the
world, which is the best antidote to mass crimes. We
also appreciate the efforts of the Special Advisers of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to ProtectMy country has prioritized dialogue and the quest
for national consensus as a way of preventing and settling
disputes within our society. The same commitment to
dialogue is at the core of our foreign policy, and we
have spared no effort to peaceably resolve conflicts
with our neighbours and offer our good offices to settle
crises in sister countries. Gabon’s commitment to peace
and the protection of the civilian population is behind
its commitment to peacekeeping missions, for example
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

In that regard, I would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Blue Helmets and to peacekeeping
contingents throughout the world. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are a special instrument for
protecting civilians. We deplore the fact that they have
to be conducted in areas where, regrettably, there is no
peace to keep and where the lives of the Blue Helmets
can be at risk. I urge the United Nations to strengthen
the benefits of peacekeeping by providing missions
with the proper resourcesGabon welcomes the fact that the Security Council
has placed the protection of civilian populations at the
core of the mandates of many peacekeeping missions,
as well as its focus on gender-based violence. We
support current efforts to better equip contingents at
the predeployment stage and during their missions to
ensure the protection of vulnerable groups, in particular
women and girlsAbove all the considerations and profound
differences affecting our world, our Assembly has the
responsibility to promote the effective implementation
of the responsibility to protect so as to better preserve
the human dignity that we share..

Vice-President, took the ChairGhana is deeply appreciative of its continued
partnership with like-minded countries — Australia,
Italy, Qatar, Denmark, Rwanda, France, Costa Rica
and Finland, to name a few — in promoting national
and regional ownership and implementation of the
responsibility to protect. We commend the Joint Office
of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect, the Global Centre
for the Responsibility to Protect and the International
Coalition for the Responsibility to Protect for their
support and active engagement with Member States and
regional organizations, and call for their cooperation in
the development of options to enhance early warning
and early action.

Ghana attaches great importance to collaboration
with civil society as strategic partners in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect. In our
national experience, non-partisan support in favour of
civil-society organization initiatives by various political
parties and our Parliament helped in the creation of
Ghana’s National Peace Council as an independent
State institution of mediation and peace facilitationThe National Peace Council today is an important part
of Ghana’s governance and peace architecture, as well
as a key component of relevant strategic partnerships
forged with bilateral, regional and global institutionsThe complementarity of the different pillars
of governance and peace infrastructure and their
interactive nature came into play during the Supreme
Court hearing on Ghana’s presidential election petition
in 2012. The hearing and its outcome demonstrated
the role of the judiciary, as an important pillar of
governance and peace, in promoting the rule of law
and safeguarding electoral integrity. Other national
institutions that played a critical role in the process
included the independent Electoral Commission; the
Inter-Party Advisory Committee; the executive, through
its National Security Council; traditional authorities;
the National Peace Council; the National Commission
for Civic Education and faith-based institutionsIn closing, my delegation calls on Member States to
declare their support for the responsibility to protect and
to enable all views to be considered in the preparation
of the report and outcome of this debate. Finally, the
combined effect of the responsibility to protect, the
responsibility while protecting and the responsibility to
remember should help us make progress in preventing
and ending genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, and in building resilience..

Clearly, building capacity for good governance
and peace should encompass all institutions in the
business of development and institutions in the area of
constitution-building, the rule of law and accountability
oversight, as well as independent watchdog and
advocacy agencies. We want to stress that building
prevention capacities at the community and national
levels must be prioritized, together with the effective
mobilization of the requisite resources for the effective
implementation of the responsibility to protect