(spoke
in Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of
this plenary meeting to address the responsibility to
protect, a topic of special importance. It is taking place
in a international context fraught with controversy
that demands that we strengthen the humanitarian
and international security norm conceived during the
2005 World Summit with a view to preventing the
worst kinds of war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

In the twentieth century, we witnessed the
degeneration of animosity and extreme nationalism
into cruel and degrading treatment during the two great
international conflagrations, resulting in frightful and
brutal crimes against entire populations, all based on
the common denominators of hatred and intolerance.

With time, the international community, represented in
the United Nations, has codified an international system
that prioritizes human rights law, international law and
international humanitarian law. The Assembly has
acknowledged that every State, as a society organized
on the basis of laws, bears the primary responsibility for
protecting its population and preventing atrocities such
as those we have witnessed in the past. That underscores
the genesis and relevance of the responsibility to protect
through its fulfilment today, a precept that is supported

through the fundamental purpose of the Charter of the
United Nations, which is both preventing the scourge of
war and promoting peace among peoples and nations.

From our perspective, the responsibility to protect
is a norm that fully corresponds to our constitutional
principles, as the State of Guatemala was established
and founded to protect individuals and families, and
its supreme purpose is achieving the common good.

In the year that marks the seventieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
responsibility to protect must be recognized as an
exemplary way to protect and defend populations from
mass atrocities. It must therefore be strengthened,
especially with the advent of new hotspots, where
we are unfortunately seeing similar patterns that in
the worst cases involve new crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing. In such instances, the Security
Council must act urgently and make effective use
of its methods of work and strategies to prevent
further acts of genocide or crimes against humanity,
in accordance with its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. In that
regard, my delegation is proud to be part of the code of
conduct initiative of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, aimed at preventing the use of the
veto in the Security Council in cases of genocide and
crimes against humanity, and we urge other States to
join in supporting it.

We therefore reiterate our call for upholding
international obligations under international law,
human rights law and refugee law, since protecting
the civilian population is an intrinsic part of them. In
that regard, Guatemala prides itself as a contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping in support of
the protection of civilians. We affirm that the principle
of the responsibility to protect is complemented by the
concept of sustainable peace, which prioritizes respect
for human rights, all based on a preventive approach
with a view to avoiding hostile confrontations.

Speaking in our national capacity, we would like to
say how pleased we are that the responsibility to protect
is on the agenda of the General Assembly at its seventysecond session, underscoring our political will to see
the issue discussed here. Accordingly, we support the
inclusion of this item on the General Assembly’s
permanent agenda, as a logical forum in which to
discuss its implementation as an exemplary mechanism
for protecting civilian populations from atrocities and
assuring them of their enjoyment of their human rights.

In conclusion, and based on our own experience,
we would like to take this opportunity to express
our rejection of and revulsion at practices that, while
they may not constitute genocide or crimes against
humanity, are certainly related to disrespect for basic
human rights, specifically the human rights of highly
vulnerable people such as migrant families and their
young children. We have watched dumbfounded in
the past few weeks as families and children have been
inhumanely and perversely separated from their parents,
a practice that has traumatic consequences for children,
leaving them in a situation of extreme vulnerability
and at risk for severe psychological and emotional
damage, with total disregard for their inalienable rights
as human beings. We call for an end to such practices,
which recall inhumane episodes of the past.