(spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate the President of the

General Assembly for scheduling this formal debate
on the responsibility to protect and the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, as such a debate has not taken
place since 2009. It is a unique opportunity for States
Members of the United Nations to promote dialogue
on action aimed at implementing the responsibility to
protect on the basis of what was agreed at the 2005
World Summit. My delegation would also like to thank
the Permanent Representatives of Australia and Ghana
for their efforts last year to ensure that this item was
included on the agenda of the General Assembly,
something that Honduras fully supported.

My country welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “Responsibility to protect: from early
warning to early action” (A/72/884) and supports
his strategy for prioritizing prevention across all the
United Nations pillars, considering the importance of
implementing the responsibility to protect.

To that end, my delegation believes that it is
essential to strengthen international cooperation in
order to respond to the major challenges currently facing
developing countries, while respecting international
human rights, international humanitarian law and
refugee and migrant law. Similarly, the responsibility to
protect must not be dissociated from efforts to achieve
genuine and sustainable peace, which contribute to
the strengthening of international peace and security
by ensuring the full participation of women and young
people in all areas of society, particularly in prevention
and the building of a genuine peace.

For Honduras, the responsibility to protect is a
priority, and although much remains to be done, in
recent years joint action has been undertaken by the
public sector, including our National Congress, our
secretariat for human rights, security and defence, as
well as academia and civil society.

The State of Honduras has made significant
progress in this area with the adoption in 2017 of a new
criminal code, which, in the framework of our adopted
regulations, establishes penalties for genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and sets out in
detail the type of penalty applicable to each of these
types of crimes against the international community.

I would also like to point out that Honduras is a
member of and active participant in the Latin American
Network for Genocide and Mass Atrocity Prevention, a
unique regional forum for implementing national and

regional initiatives aimed at genocide prevention and
education in the ministries of the participating Latin
American countries.

Similarly, we have incorporated the topic of
genocide and mass atrocities, with a preventive focus,
into the training curriculum for public servants and
members of the Honduran armed forces and published
educational material with a focus on preventing
discrimination in that area. In addition, public servants
of the human rights secretariat and other Government
institutions have received training from the Auschwitz
Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, for which we
express our gratitude.

In conclusion, I would like to express my country’s
commitment to the Rome Statute and, together with the
relevant national, regional and international bodies,
to continuing to make progress in preventing atrocity
crimes and in terms of the responsibility to protect the
people of Honduras.