I would first like to
express our appreciation for the report of the Secretary-
General dated 1 June 2018 entitled “Responsibility to
protect: from early warning to early action” (A/72/884)a demonstration of transparency and inclusiveness and
a reference to the principle of non-interventionOur Constitution mandates that the Government and
the people promote and protect — as a priority — human
rights for everyone. At the same time, the principle of
upholding humanity remains one of Indonesia’s longstanding norms and values. A society’s ability to protect
its most vulnerable members is therefore important. To
that end, the responsibility to protect should always be
our fundamental credo, on the basis of the unassailable
premise that innocent civilians are entitled to protection
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

In 2012, ASEAN adopted its own Human Rights
Declaration, which details member States’ commitment
to upholding human rights for its 600 million people
and beyond. It has also established the ASEAN Institute
for Peace and Reconciliation, which is dedicated to
research activities and to providing recommendations
to member States on peace, conflict management and
conflict resolutionToday, 13 years after the adoption of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome document, there is still an ongoing
debate on the concept and implementation of the right
to protect. In our view, this is positive progress. An
important yet delicate issue such as the responsibility
to protect deserves attention and an in-depth dialogue
until a balance is reached between maintaining
international peace and security and upholding the
sovereignty of the State.

Indonesia believes that the responsibility to protect
should be viewed in a broader context. It must also
focus on prevention. In that regard, Indonesia supports
the report of the Secretary-General, which mentions
early-warning systems in particular. In our view, while
human and institutional capacity are obviously of great
importance, capacity-building is also essential in areas
such as the strengthening of legal frameworks and earlywarning mechanisms. If the responsibility to protect
is to be successfully and effectively implemented,
systematic measures must be put in place to promote
its principlesIndonesia would also like to once again emphasize
the importance of strengthening institutional
frameworks and building the resilience of communities
throughout the world. We must work ceaselessly to
promote respect and tolerance among all peoples at
various levels.

We reiterate our belief that regional organizations
can and must play a more active role in implementing
the responsibility to protect, as we are doing with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)The establishment of the ASEAN Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights will serve as a useful
model for regional prevention measures. The fact that all
members of ASEAN are members of the Commission is
Finally, I wish to take this opportunity once again
to call on the Security Council to recognize its critical
role in the prevention of genocide, ethnic cleansing,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We reiterate
that the permanent members of the Security Council
must refrain from the use of the veto in the face of the
potential occurrence of such crimes, including in the
context of the protection of the Palestinian civilian
population by the international community, as supported
by a large majority of the United Nations membership.