Ireland welcomes the
inclusion of the responsibility to protect on the agenda
of the General Assembly. We hope it can evolve into a
standing item for future debatesThe World Summit Outcome document of 2005 was
a groundbreaking achievement, and since its adoption,
the responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing has emerged as an important global principleParagraphs 138 and 139 of that document effectively
outline the three pillars of responsibility, assistance
and response. Ireland reaffirms its commitment to
those pillarsThe three pillars were never intended to be
sequential in their implementation. Rather, they focused
on an early and flexible response tailored to individual
situations. In particular, misconceptions about the
relationship between the third pillar and military
intervention must be addressed. From diplomacy,
mediation, public advocacy and humanitarian
assistance to peacekeeping, sanctions, embargoes and
peacebuilding, the broad range of measures available
under the third pillar effectively guards against its
being equated with military intervention.

Ireland warmly welcomes the Secretary-General’s
balanced report, entitled “Responsibility to protect:
from early warning to early action” (A/72/884). Its
focus on strengthening existing capacities, promoting
accountability and expanding civilian action provides
important guidance on how we might prioritize action in
the area of the responsibility to protect. The report also
notes that the gap between our words of commitment
and the experience of vulnerable populations around
the world has grown. Thirteen years after agreeing to
the principle of the responsibility to protect, we must
now prioritize and meaningfully invest in taking its
implementation forward within the United Nations.

The report states that the international community has
been insufficiently resolute in its implementation and
that trends continue to move in the wrong directionGiven that we are marking the seventieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide this year, we
strongly encourage Member States that have not yet
ratified or acceded to the Convention to do so as a matter
of high priority. We also call on the States Members
of the United Nations to support the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
regarding Security Council action against genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, which has been
endorsed by 117 countries, and the French and Mexican
declaration on voluntary restraint in the use of the veto
by permanent members of the Security Council. Those
complementary initiatives are crucial to ensuring that
the Security Council acts effectively and consistently
when faced with mass atrocity situations.

Ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes
is one of best ways to prevent their recurrenceRecognizing that States have the primary responsibility
to investigate and prosecute crimes committed
within their jurisdiction, Ireland fully supports the
International Criminal Court, which will celebrate its
twentieth anniversary on 17 July. It remains the most
important institutional development in the battle to end
impunity for genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We also welcome the European Union’s
appointment of national responsibility-to-protect focal
points and encourage other regional organizations and
Member States to do likewise and to engage in the
excellent work of the Global Network of R2P Focal
Points.

Multilateral cooperation is our best chance to avert
man-made atrocities. We therefore encourage better
use of the United Nations system to bring potential
mass atrocity situations to the early attention of the
Security Council. As a candidate for the Security
Council for the 2021-2022 term, Ireland will seek to
ensure that the Council acts to prevent mass atrocities,
but it can do so only if alerted to the situations in timeRegular open debates within the Security Council on
the responsibility to protect are to be encouraged, as
are regular briefings by the Special Advisers of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
on the Responsibility to Protect. The Council would
also benefit from regular briefings on mass atrocity
situations by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. Such measures can only serve to
aid early-warning situations in which populations are
at risk of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.

With regard to the link between the Human Rights
Council and the Security Council, Geneva-based
institutions and mechanisms play an increasingly
important role in preventing and responding to mass
atrocity crimes. We encourage the informal dialogue
that has taken place with a view to improving the use of
the universal periodic review in that connectionIreland’s strong peacekeeping tradition allows
us to recognize the importance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations as a vehicle for integrating
responsibility-to-protect capacities. In line with
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
peacekeepers need the requisite training and resources
to adequately protect civilians. In that context, we
encourage the integration of the United Nations
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes into the
training of all United Nations peacekeeping staff.

The principle of the responsibility to protect is now
widely accepted, yet concerns about its appropriate
implementation continue to be debated. While debate
is to be encouraged for so critical a concept, it must
not be used as an excuse for passivity or inactionThe international community must stand firm against
the incorrect application of the responsibility to
protect through a broadening of its scope, its selective
application or its malicious misapplication for a State’s
own strategic interests. The responsibility to protect
does not lower the threshold for pre-emptive intervention
or use of force. However, any ambiguity surrounding
the operationalization of the concept must be addressed
and agreed on so that it can be effectively implementedAs the Secretary-General states in his report, we
have allowed disagreements about the past to foil our
unity of purpose in the present. We continue to miss
opportunities to save countless lives in situations we
could and should have foreseen. Through the proper
operationalization of the responsibility to protect, we
can make major strides towards preventing instances of
mass atrocities and loss of life..

Ireland is deeply concerned about the worrying
trend of the use of forced displacement as a military
tactic by State and non-State actors and its disastrous
consequences, particularly for minority populationsThere is an undeniable connection between the current
global crisis of forced displacement and the failure to
uphold the responsibility to protect and prevent mass
atrocity crimes