At the outset, I would like
to thank the President for convening this important
meeting. The Government of Japan welcomes the
holding of a formal debate on the responsibility to
protect in the General Assembly, the first on the
responsibility to protect since 2009, and we commend
Australia and Ghana for their leadership in that regard.

As the Secretary-General’s report (A/72/884)
correctly points out, the gap has grown. The primary
responsibility of States and the collective responsibility
of the international community to protect people
from mass atrocities are fully acknowledged today.

Nevertheless, civilians are increasingly trapped in
armed conflict. The increase in battle-related deaths
has been sharp and the number of people forcibly
displaced is larger than ever. I agree with the SecretaryGeneral that we should match our commitments to the
experience of vulnerable people on the ground, and I
want to highlight once again that prevention and early
action are key in the context of the responsibility
to protect.

In 2015, as the concept of responsibility to protect
became clearer, Japan decided to join the Global Network
of R2P Focal Points. For the past three years we have
been participating actively in discussions with relevant
Member States, the United Nations and civil society
with the aim of preventing mass atrocities. I believe that
now is the time for the international community to work
together to implement the responsibility to protect.

In the belief that Japan has an active role to play,
we have been mobilizing our official development
assistance for building the capacity of Member States
so as to assist national efforts in areas related to the
responsibility to protect, such as the rule of law, and
organizing various types of seminars for legal experts
and Government officials in Asia and Africa.

For example, for the past three years, Japan
has conducted a training course on criminal justice
for French-speaking African countries, with eight
francophone African countries participating, targeting

individuals working in the field of criminal justice. In
Viet Nam, we have been lending technical assistance
for more than 20 years. Such training courses and
assistance aim to improve criminal investigation
standards in the target countries, ensure the protection
of the human rights of suspects, improve the planning
and management of criminal justice-related institutions
and thereby contribute to strengthening capacities in
the area of the rule of law.

We strongly believe that the international
community’s collective action in linking development
assistance with the responsibility to protect will help
advance the implementation of prevention and early
action. Japan intends to further promote its support in
the areas that I just mentioned.

We also believe that the Security Council not only
has the primary responsibility for dealing with actual
conflicts but should also play a more active role in
preventing them. Unfortunately, however, we have
witnessed some cases where the Security Council failed
to fulfil its function to prevent or end mass atrocities,
owing to the use of the veto. In that connection, Japan
continues to support the initiative of France and Mexico
on the suspension of the veto in the case of mass
atrocities, as well as the code of conduct formulated by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

Considering the reality of the increasing gap
between our commitment and what is happening on the
ground, it goes without saying that we should all redouble
our efforts to protect people from mass atrocities.

The international community has been discussing
the concept of the responsibility to protect since the
2005 World Summit. Its implementation requires our
continued commitment and collective efforts. Japan
supports the inclusion of the responsibility to protect as
a formal standing agenda item of the General Assembly
and is determined to collaborate with the international
community on this critical and very important issue.