I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum members
represented at the United Nations, namely, Australia,
Fiji, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall
Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Kiribati.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
implementation of the principle of the responsibility
to protect principle, as set out in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome, must be
our collective focus. Our task is not to renegotiate or
reinterpret the commitment our leaders made in 2005
but to implement it.

We welcome the debate in the General Assembly
today. Our hope is that this can be part of an ongoing
dialogue in the Assembly about how we can better
protect populations from mass atrocities, including by
sharing experiences, perspectives and lessons learned
to help improve practice internationally, regionally and
domestically. We agree with the Secretary-General
that implementing the responsibility to protect and
prioritizing prevention in the United Nations system
are interlinked and complementary. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report highlights, preventive capacities
should be cultivated at all levels so that early warning
also means early action.

The Pacific Islands Forum members believe that
early dialogue, partnership and action, particularly
at the regional level, are critical to delivering on
our responsibility to protect. The importance of
early warning and early action was recognized
and enshrined by Forum leaders in a declaration in
Biketawa, Kiribati, at the beginning of this century.

That important document recognizes the vulnerability
of all Forum members to civil unrest and other threats
to our population’s security. The declaration articulates
a common commitment to resolving conflict through
regional cooperation.

The declaration has served as the springboard for a
number of regional assistance missions. That includes
the highly successful Regional Assistance Mission to
Solomon Islands (RAMSI), which commenced in 2003
and concluded last year. The Mission was a partnership
among the people and the Government of Solomon
Islands and 15 contributing members from the Pacific
region. The Mission’s mandate was to help lay the
foundations for long-term stability and prosperity in
Solomon Islands, including by restoring civil order,
restoring the machinery of Government and helping
rebuild the economy.

The consent of Solomon Islands and its partnership
were prerequisites for the Mission, as well as essential
elements in its success. RAMSI’s regional identity
was its core underlying strength. Every Pacific
Island Forum country participated in RAMSI, which
benefited from the diverse cultures and experiences
of its contributing members. Since 2003, thousands
of police, military and civilian personnel from across
the region served with RAMSI, working side by side
with Solomon Islanders. Another critical reason for
RAMSI’s success is that assistance was requested and
provided in the early stages of unrest, lawlessness and
violence. The warning signs were present and action
was taken. That is an example of the second pillar of the
responsibility to protect in action.

Pacific Islands Forum leaders have committed to
negotiate an updated Biketawa-plus declaration, to guide
regional responses to emerging security challenges. At
the heart of that commitment is a recognition that no
one country can meet the security challenges we face
alone.