We welcome
today’s first formal debate in the General Assembly on
the responsibility to protect, and we align ourselves with
the statement delivered by the representative of Qatar
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect (see A/72/PV.99).

Despite the increasing number of occasions on
which the norm of the responsibility to protect is
referenced in United Nations resolutions and debates,
the actual gap between our expressed commitment to
protect civilian populations and our collective action
to do so in crises has widened. Thirteen years after the
2005 World Summit, it is high time to take that norm
from the realm of the conceptual to concrete action.

The primary responsibility of each State to protect
its population from crimes against humanity, war
crimes, genocide and ethnic cleansing is not contested.

In adopting the norm of the responsibility to protect, we
have also collectively agreed on our joint responsibility
in the event that individual Governments are either
unable or unwilling to fulfil this task.

The norm of the responsibility to protect provides
for a wide range of measures, from diplomatic
engagement to more robust enforcement measures. The
Security Council, as the guardian of international peace
and security, is given a special role to that end. In many
situations involving mass atrocity crimes, however, the
Council is paralysed owing to the use or threat of use of
the veto. The steadily increasing number of supporters
of the Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency
group code of conduct — 117 States at present — is an
expression of the collective expectation of the States
Members of the United Nations.

Council membership comes with responsibilities
and a stated commitment to taking action to end or,
ideally, prevent atrocity crimes. The 117 States that
have joined the code of conduct have committed to
supporting timely and decisive action to this end and to
refraining from voting against credible draft resolutions
before the Council that pursue this goal. In our view, the
code of conduct is a baseline that all States running for
Security Council membership should be able to meet.

We invite all States that have not yet done so to join and
work for the application of the code.

It is disappointing that the political consensus around
the norm of the responsibility to protect, 13 years after
we agreed on it unanimously, remains fragile. This is
due in no small part to misrepresentation of the norm
with respect to the use of force. The norm is frequently
misconstrued as an attempt to bypass the Charter of
the United Nations and to justify military action that
has not been authorized by the Security Council. This
is a mistake, because it harms not only the norm but
also our international legal order. The responsibility to

protect does not alter the prohibition on the illegal use
of force under the Charter of the United Nations, one of
the most important building blocks of the international
order; rather, it spells out clearly that military action is
possible as a last resort and only when authorized by
the Council under Chapter VII.

If the norm of the responsibility to protect is
positioned squarely within the framework of the
existing regime with respect to the use of force, there
will soon be an additional tool for the Council to be
more effective in playing its enforcement role regarding
the use of force. On 17 July the International Criminal
Court (ICC) will commence its exercise of jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression, the most serious form of
the illegal use of force.

In addition to the established prohibition of the
illegal use of force under the Charter of the United
Nations, the ICC will, in a complementary manner,
offer the avenue of individual criminal responsibility
for those in breach of this prohibition. We hope
that a significant number of States will join the
35 States parties that have already ratified the Kampala
amendments on the crime of aggression, governing the
Court’s jurisdiction in this respect.

We also hope that the Council will avail itself of
this new tool in its work to regulate the legality of
the use of force in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

In addition to this new function, the International
Criminal Court will continue playing a direct, effective
role with respect to the issue we are considering today.

Ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes is an
essential element in preventing their recurrence. Despite
its obvious limitations, in the absence of universality of
the Rome Statute, and with the Security Council being
at best a reluctant enforcer of accountability, the ICC
remains the centrepiece of the fight against impunity
for such crimes and deserves our continued support.