(spoke in French): My
delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.

They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of Friends
of the Responsibility to Protect (see A/72/PV.99).

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on
the operationalization of the responsibility to protect
(A/72/884). We share the view that the transition from
early warning to early action is a collective pledge of
our willingness to act so that the analysis and earlywarning mechanisms put in place in recent years can
achieve full effectiveness.

We also appreciate the important work done by
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect,
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, and the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng. Luxembourg
encourages the Secretary-General to appoint a successor
to Mr. Šimonović as soon as possible.

We thank Ghana and Australia for their initiative
in putting the responsibility to protect on the agenda
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session.

Luxembourg supports the permanent inclusion of this
item on the Assembly’s agenda, as well as the adoption
of a draft resolution affirming our responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Current events make it clear that whatever
normative progress has been made in recent years is
inadequate to the realities on the ground. The worrisome
developments we have seen in the past few weeks are a
reminder of the fact that respect for the rule of law is a
key principle in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Since the adoption of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document, civilian deaths in conflict have
increased tenfold. Last week, on World Refugee Day,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Filippo Grandi, called attention to the fact that more
than 68 million people are currently forcibly displaced.

The list of conflicts in which we have seen large-scale
atrocities — sometimes in front of our very eyes and in
real time — is too long to cite them all today.

In the face of the resultant human suffering,
diplomatic impasses are multiplying. We know that this
situation is not inevitable and therefore fully support
the code of conduct developed by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group to promote action
by the Security Council against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. We also support the

initiative of France and Mexico aimed at avoiding the
use of the veto in situations where there is a risk that
mass atrocities may be committed against the civilian
population. We believe that the responsibility to
protect does not contradict State sovereignty but rather
consolidates and legitimizes it.

Luxembourg deems the protection and promotion
of human rights to be fundamental to preventing
atrocities. The Universal Periodic Reviews carried out
within the framework of the Human Rights Council and
its special procedures mandate holders play a leading
role in United Nations early-warning systems and
recommendations for early action.

Luxembourg encourages all Member States to
cooperate fully with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and with all
special procedures mandate holders. Luxembourg
encourages the United Nations entities working in
the field to continue with their horizontal “human
rights first” approach.

We consider the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity
Crimes developed by the Office of the Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Special Adviser
on the Responsibility to Protect an effective tool, for
the United Nations as well as for regional organizations
and civil society.

Finally, we believe that the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect — in which Luxembourg
participates in both New York and Geneva — and the
Global Network of R2P Focal Points, in which we
also participate, strengthen existing measures. We
encourage all States that have yet to designate a focal
point for the responsibility to protect to do so.

This year we commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Luxembourg
believes that the responsibility to protect and the
fight against impunity are inseparable. We therefore
encourage all States to ratify or accede to this
indispensable instrument of international law.

Twenty years after its adoption, we also call for the
universalization of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Luxembourg remains committed to an
effective multilateral system and an international order
founded on the rule of law. Our efforts to safeguard
human dignity must never give in to intimidation, and
insularity must never become the norm. That is why,

13 years after the 2005 World Summit, we reaffirm our
full commitment to the responsibility to protect.