I want to thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening
today’s plenary meeting, which enables all Member
States to deliberate and exchange frank views on the
report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility to
protect, as contained in document A/72/884As the General Assembly agreed last year, the
inclusion of the issue of the responsibility to protect
on the Assembly’s agenda underlines the principled
commitment of the United Nations to the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, the number of people killed in conflicts has
risen tenfold since the 2005 World Summit. Such
negative trends pose a serious threat to international
peace and security, as situations involving atrocity
crimes can generate lasting instability both within and
across borders. My delegation shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view that it is important for us to continue
building a world based on the rule of law with strong
multilateral institutions, which can protect its people
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. My delegation also joins other
Member States in acknowledging the noble intentions
of the concept of the responsibility to protect, which
are to ensure that the unspeakable tragedies that have
occurred and are currently occurring in various parts of
the world will never recur.

Malaysia has been closely following the
deliberations on the issue of the responsibility to protect
and the follow-up dialogue sessions since the World
Summit in 2005. My delegation notes that a divergence
of opinions continues to persist among Member States
on the concept, understanding and implementation of
the responsibility to protect, especially with regard to
State sovereignty and an international mandate to actMalaysia sincerely hopes that we can quickly resolve
that disagreement in order to respond effectively to
atrocities and prevent more genocidesMalaysia believes that non-military solutions
should always be the first option, because military
interventions can only cause further human catastrophe.

We will continue to support the use of various
non-military measures in efforts to respond to and
prevent the escalation of atrocity crimes, including
mediation, monitoring, observer and fact-finding
missions, commissions of inquiry and public advocacy
by international officialsNevertheless, in addressing atrocity crimes
committed by non-State armed groups, we acknowledge
the emergence of new challenges, particularly those
related to the impact of new technologies. Some
modifications in the preventive and protective strategies
of all stakeholders may be required in that regard,
and Malaysia stands ready to work closely with other
Member States, regional organizations and civil society
in addressing, anticipating, preventing and responding
to such emerging threats and challenges. My delegation
notes that the international community’s capacity for
early warning and assessment of atrocity-crime risks
has significantly improved over the past few years.

Malaysia also sees merit in the three strategies outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report for strengthening early
action and early warning, which include reviewing and
strengthening existing preventive capacities, promoting
accountability and innovating by expanding civilian
action for atrocity preventionIn that context, my delegation supports the idea
that prevention must become the rule rather than the
exception. The Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Human Rights Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional and subregional organizations
can all enhance their contributions to the prevention of
atrocity crimes by demonstrating a greater willingness
to consider and respond to the earliest signs of risk. In
that respect, we join others in calling for restraint in
the use of the veto in the Security Council, especially
in cases of atrocity crimes. For practical reasons,
Malaysia is of the view that the exercise of the veto
should be regulated so as to enable the international
community to act promptly to save innocent people
from brutal atrocities.

In principle, Malaysia welcomes the noble
intentions that the responsibility to protect is intended
to accomplish. Nevertheless, we want to reiterate
that it requires continued, in-depth discussions to
enable the international community to clearly define
its understanding, applications, implementation and
effects on States on both the international and internal
fronts. Only through all Member States’ complete
understanding and systematic application of the
responsibility to protect do we believe that we can
truly accept it as an international norm. To that end,
Malaysia stands ready to work closely with the United
Nations and its Member States in developing options
to strengthen civilian action to prevent atrocity crimes.