I thank the President of
the General Assembly and the Secretary-General for their
important statements (see A/72/PV.99), and Australia
and Ghana for seeing to it that the responsibility to
protect is taking its rightful place on the agenda today. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/72/884) entitled “Responsibility to protect: from
early warning to early action”. Indeed, early warning
and early action could save the world from many of the
disasters we are currently experiencing. We therefore
agree with the recommendations in the report and
encourage everyone to see that they are implemented.

It has been nine years since the last — and first — formal
General Assembly debate on the responsibility to protect
in 2009 (see A/63/PV.97 to A/63/PV.101). My delegation
believes that the time is indeed ripe to reaffirm our
support for the commitments we made at the 2005 World
Summit with regard to the responsibility to protectWith particular reference to paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome document (resolution
60/1), Nigeria would like to take this opportunity to
call for the full implementation of all three pillars of
the norm by reviewing and strengthening existing
preventive capacities where necessary, continuing
to encourage and promote accountability for atrocity
prevention, and innovating by expanding civilian action
for atrocity prevention and drawing on all available
resources to meet the pressing challenges.

The disturbing trend of mass atrocity crimes has
continued around the world, and it requires that we
work together at the national, regional and global levels
to halt the problem. We must get to the root of all the
issues ravaging our peoples, most especially civilians,
who are too often targeted. Some of the challenges
identified are weak structures and institutions, which
should be addressed. In that regard, we must enhance
multilateral cooperation in order to strengthen States’
capacities to deal with threats posed by violent conflicts
and crimes against humanityWe urge the Security Council to make even greater
use of its situational-awareness briefings and the Arria
Formula mechanism, and to invite more briefers in
order to achieve greater effectiveness in preventing
mass atrocities through early warning and early action.

Furthermore, by strengthening cooperation with the
Human Rights Council, the Security Council could
achieve even greater gains in areas where populations
are at risk of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
or crimes against humanity. Nigeria also believes that
it is important to note the hard work of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Advisers on the Prevention of
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect and to
commend their efforts so far. We also want to take
this opportunity to urge all Member States to uphold
their obligations under international human rights,
humanitarian and refugee law, which underpin the
commitment to the responsibility to protect. In that
regard, we encourage Member States that have not yet
ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide to do so
without further delay.

Another important area is the need for stronger
judicial institutions within States and cooperation
between States. Nigeria is a signatory to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, which,
incidentally, will celebrate its twentieth anniversary on
17 July and remains an undeniably important body in
the battle to end impunity for genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanityWe are also pleased to note that eight of the
current 14 United Nations peacekeeping operations
have protection-of-civilian mandates, and that the
responsibility to protect has been referenced directly
in a number of those mandates by the Security
Council, including in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of Congo and South Sudan.

Another terrible source of harm to civilians in
conflict has been the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons, as the Security Council has recognized
in its resolutions 2274 (2016), 2283 (2016), 2296 (2016)
and 2313 (2016). Every region of the world has suffered
from the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
particularly Africa. We must make use of international
instruments such as the Arms Trade Treaty, as they
can contribute greatly to protecting civilians and
preventing mass atrocities. The proliferation of small
arms and light weapons has helped fuel the terrorist
activities of Boko Haram in the north-east of NigeriaThough it has been seriously decimated, Boko Haram,
through its lone-wolf attacks, is still a challenge that we
are dealing with.

Nigeria condemns the growing number of deliberate
attacks on civilians, humanitarian workers, journalists
and peacekeepers across the world, which have occurred
everywhere, in markets, hospitals and schools. In that
regard, and as a demonstration of our commitment
to the cause and in line with the Secretary-General’s
earlier recommendations, Nigeria has appointed a
national focal point for the responsibility to protect and
set up a presidential committee on small arms and light
weapons to tackle the issue of their proliferation. The
Nigerian Army has also set up a human rights desk to
ensure that military operations respect their rules of
engagement. Furthermore, the Nigerian Government
has taken major steps to enhance security at camps
for internally displaced people in order to reduce their
vulnerability and promote their eventual safe return to
their homes and reintegration into society.

Nigeria has also gone far with demining activities,
the removal of improvised explosive devices and the
provision of military escorts for humanitarian workersIn order to further forestall situations that could lead
to mass atrocity crimes, we have set up a presidential
initiative for the north-east. It is a comprehensive
recovery blueprint that integrates all actors and actions
in a coordinated set of activities aimed at north-eastern
Nigeria’s rapid recovery from the havoc caused by the
Boko Haram insurgents. The Nigerian Government
has also launched a safe schools initiative to provide
safe education in conflict-affected areas of the northeast and has endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration,
under which we are committed to implementing the
guidelines for protecting schools and universities from
military use during armed conflict. Narratives that
support violence are also being countered in schools,
with ongoing efforts to deradicalize convicted or
repentant terrorists by deploying emergency teams
of psychosocial counsellors and health professionalsIn conclusion, we all have a responsibility to protect
one another, which is why we are united as nations. Our
hope is that we will collectively identify implementable
strategies that can effectively prevent atrocities and
protect populations around the world. We believe we
are on the right track..

Work is also being done with the communities affected
through various economic revitalization programmes
aimed at the people most affected by terrorism and
violent extremism