Let me first note that
Poland aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier
by the observer of the European Union (see A/72/
PV.99)Poland welcomes with satisfaction today’s debate
on the responsibility to protect. In 2009 we were a
sponsor of the Assembly’s resolution 63/308, its first
stand-alone resolution on the responsibility to protect,
and we declare our readiness to support that important
concept wherever possibleI would like to congratulate Australia and Ghana
on their proposal to convene today’s meeting and
to welcome the Secretary-General’s report entitled
“Responsibility to protect: from early warning to early
action” (A/72/884). There is no doubt that the key to
effective preventive measures is early-warning capacity.

I want to focus on three issues that we believe
are of crucial importance in today’s timely debate:
respect for international law, conflict prevention
and accountabilityFirst, the international community should get back
to principles. Respect for international law instruments,
including the Charter of the United Nations, can be
a true preventive factor in stopping mass atrocitiesPoland raised that issue during its presidency of the
Security Council last month and organized two open
debates with the aim of promoting the basic rules
of international law. We all had the opportunity to
listen to more than 160 statements calling for respect
for international law. We should be true to our words
and fully comply with the existing set of norms and
standards. We cannot shy away from being vocal when
laws are broken.

The second issue is conflict prevention. Using
the right combination of carefully tailored measures
is crucial. Preventive action should be focused
on specific regions. Measures are most effective
when they are individualized and aimed at specific
problems. There is no one-size-fits-all approach. Local
ownership is critical, and early action succeeds only if
it has the support of those who should benefit from itLocal, community-level engagement must be further
integrated into preventive actionThird is accountability. We must not allow those
who commit atrocities to feel they are immune to
prosecution. There is no peace without justice. We are
morally, politically and legally obliged to comply with
existing measures aimed at ending impunity, ensuring
accountability and achieving justice for the victimsIn conclusion, I would like to emphasize that we
must renew the commitment that our leaders made at the
2005 World Summit in order to help States build their
capacity to protect their populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity
and assist those who are under stress before crisis and
conflict break out. The responsibility to protect is not
an abstract concept. Implementing it means saving the
lives of people who have been left without protection or
hope. We should do our best to let them lead their lives
without suffering..

The Security Council — but also the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council — should continue to
consider ways to make better use of existing tools to
strengthen accountability for international crimesWe have at our disposal sanctions, arms embargoes,
fact-finding missions, independent mechanisms for
collecting and storing evidence, commissions of inquiry
and justice mechanisms, including international and
hybrid courts and tribunals. Everything should be done
to ensure that they are used effectively