(spoke in
Russian): From the very beginning, our delegation has
opposed the inclusion of the concept of the responsibility
to protect as an item on the General Assembly’s agenda
at this session, a decision that we believe is mistaken.

I would like to briefly recall the history surrounding
the issue.

The only recognized source for the concept of the
responsibility to protect is the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document. However, since then — that is, 13
years ago — States have not been able to agree on a
uniform interpretation of its provisions. Moreover, the
concept, on which there has always been a wide range
of opinions, has been consistently degraded. Against
that backdrop, in autumn 2017 a group of States,
instead of continuing our interactive dialogue, forced a
vote in the General Committee and then in the General
Assembly in order to bring about the convening of
today’s meeting. Such methods have only led to further
confrontation, as the current discussion has confirmed.

As a result, the initiators of the vote are destroying the
fragile consensus of 2005 with their own hands. At this
point, we have to conclude that it no longer exists. It is
worth noting that previously, while the responsibility to
protect was never a norm or rule, there was at least an
understanding of its conceptual foundations. Now there
is not even that.

The reports of the Secretariat, including document
A/72/884, claim some progress in the implementation
of the concept. It is difficult for us to understand what
that consists of, as there is no evidence for it in the
report itself. Some routine repetitive attempts have been
made year after year to formalize it, including through
the creation of national focal points, but it is still not
clear what their practical contribution is. In theory, the
reports should establish the current state of affairs in

the discussion of the concept, indicate all the existing
points of view and, importantly, the controversial
aspects that States should come to an agreement
on. There has been nothing about any of this in the
reports. Incidentally, paragraph 8 of the current report
states explicitly that the Special Adviser consulted
widely with Member States during its preparation.

However, during the round tables that were held for
that purpose, there was harsh criticism of the concept
and its implementation in practice. Why are we not
seeing those positions in the report? A large number of
delegations have spoken about the serious flaws in the
concept during the interactive dialogues and in other
formats for many years, and yet the complete lack of
analysis of those problems in the Secretariat documents
continues. There is no point in hoping that formalizing
the discussion in the General Assembly will somehow
change these approaches to the issue.

If I may, I would now like to turn to the essence
of the contradictions around the concept, which has
now lost any basis for consensus on it. In its original
form, it was conceived as an instrument capable of
making a significant contribution to strengthening
international peace and security. The idea carried a
powerful, positive humanistic potential. However, its
application in practice has turned out to be a disaster,
and the people it was supposed to protect have suffered
even more as a result. Now the responsibility to protect
is associated with a particular sequence of events,
consisting of illegal interference from outside by
force, so-called regime change, the destruction of State
systems, governmental paralysis and economic ruin.

We should point out that many have previously
posited the Libya story as the first case of the practical
application of the concept. What was the result?
The NATO coalition’s military actions regarding
Libya, carried out under the pretext of protecting the
population, plunged the country into a lengthy period
of chaos and instability. The loss of human life, the
destruction of public administration and infrastructure,
the emergence of Da’esh in Libya and the massive
migration crisis in the Mediterranean have continued
to this day. The absence of any announced result
in this case is not surprising. In reality, the military
operation in Libya had only one goal, which was
removing the country’s then leader from the political
arena. Once Muammar Al-Qadhafi had been killed and
his Government removed from power, the protection of

civilians was quickly forgotten. That is what we now
associate with the responsibility to protect.

A more recent example occurred on 14 April, when
three permanent members of the Security Council,
committed to firmly upholding the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations on the non-use of force,
committed an act of aggression against a sovereign
State, in this case Syria. After the events of that day, the
best that the Government of Great Britain could come
up with was a reference to the philosophy of so-called
humanitarian intervention, which the international
community has repudiated. Let us remember that it
was the forerunner of this concept of the responsibility
to protect that was the basis for the slogans under
which NATO troops dropped bombs on civilians in
Yugoslavia. No one has been held responsible for
the barbaric interference in the affairs of the former
Yugoslavia, Libya or Syria, or for its consequences. We
often hear about the importance of combating impunity
in this Hall. At long last, is it not time to deal with
these champions of humanitarian intervention and their
contemporary equivalents in their gross violations of
international law?
In conclusion, we would like to once again affirm
our position that any formalization of discussions on
the responsibility to protect is pointless and in many
cases completely useless. We have so far seen no
disposition among the concept’s ideologues to analyse
its inherent contradictions or recognize the blatant
abuses committed and disastrous mistakes that have
been made in the attempts to implement it. Instead,
we are invited to discuss non-essential elements and
details. We are therefore against the inclusion of this
issue as a standing item on the agenda of the General
Assembly. The current debate in the Assembly has
nonetheless been of some use. It has once again shown
that if nothing is done about these mistakes, the concept
will surely suffer the same fate as its predecessor,
humanitarian intervention, and will eventually fade
into oblivion.