First of all, I would like
to welcome the inclusion of the responsibility to protect
and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity on the formal
agenda of this session of the General Assembly and
support including it as a standing itemThe Government of the Republic of San Marino
is deeply concerned about and firmly condemns
the growing number of attacks on civilians,
schools, hospitals, places of worship, peacekeepers,
humanitarian workers and journalists. We affirm our
commitment to the principles underpinning the norms
of the responsibility to protect and to obligations
under human rights and humanitarian law such as
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, which marks its seventieth
anniversary this year.

Prevention and accountability play a vital role
in preventing and stopping atrocity crimes. We fully
support the Secretary-General’s focus on prevention as
a primary aspect of our Organization and a meaningful
approach to averting large-scale violations and abuses
of human rights and humanitarian law. We emphasize
the importance of all available preventive tools,
including dialogue, mediation and diplomacy, to stop
and prevent the escalation of any mass atrocity crimesThe International Criminal Court remains crucial
in the fight against impunity for genocide and crimes
against humanity and represents a core element in the
implementation of the responsibility to protect. Through
its work, the Court helps to foster accountability and
therefore promote prevention and reconciliation.

We commend initiatives such as the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group’s code of conduct
regarding Security Council action on genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and France
and Mexico’s declaration on voluntary restraint in
the use of the veto by the permanent members of the
Security CouncilSan Marino supports the work of the Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect and their work in mainstreaming this topic
within the United Nations system. The United Nations
system can play a substantive role in mass atrocity
prevention. As underlined in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/72/884), early warning must be systematically
linked to decision-making about early actionToday we are seeing devastating humanitarian
crises and more than 65 million civilians displaced
by atrocities and conflict. The rule of law and strong
multilateral institutions are particularly crucial right
now if we want to bridge the gap between our words of
commitment and the atrocities suffered by vulnerable
populations. We must act with determination and in a
united and concerted fashion. It is our individual and
collective duty to continue working for the realization
of the responsibility to protect..

By making better use of the instruments at their
disposal, the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council can move effectively
from early warning to early action and therefore make
a big difference in the prevention of atrocity crimes. We
would also like to underline the important role played
by civil society, the business sector and religious and
traditional leaders. Civilian action has great potential
for easing tension and preventing violence