We thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening this timely
debate on the responsibility to protect and the prevention
of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his 2018 report (A/72/884), entitled “Responsibility
to protect: from early warning to early action”.

South Africa believes that the role of the
international community in conflicts must remain
that of assisting affected States. That must be done
in accordance with their own constitutional and legal
provisions and with the acknowledgment that the
Security Council has a responsibility to act to stop such
violations if it becomes clear that the specific State is
manifestly failing to implement its responsibility in
that regard.

The political basis for the responsibility to
protect was firmly set out in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (resolution 60/1). Our respective
leaders displayed a clear intolerance for impunity and
criminality by adopting the document by consensus.

Going back on that undertaking is therefore not
an option.

My delegation strongly agrees that prevention of
atrocities is central to the successful implementation of
the responsibility to protect. We continue to advocate
for greater focus on the wide range of the tools of
diplomacy available to us. South Africa has long been
a proponent of improving response methods provided
in the Charter of the United Nations for the pacific
settlement of disputes, and of ensuring that the Security
Council redirects its responses to emerging conflicts.

The failure to employ new response mechanisms puts
the responsibility on the General Assembly to take
action, especially if populations are at risk of suffering
from crimes in the context of the responsibility to
protect. In addition, we believe that in order to succeed,
the responsibility to protect requires the sustained and
predictable provision of resources.

Present-day conflicts are largely centred on internal
strife in Member States and transnational threats.

Unfortunately, while the world has changed, the Security
Council has largely remained the same. Contemporary
challenges have brought divisions within the Council to
the forefront, especially among its permanent members.

At times, such paralysis has cost human lives. A more
representative Council would be more effective in
dealing with complex contemporary challenges. As
advised by the Secretary-General, preventive action
is built on trust, transparency and accountability. The
Security Council should therefore be cognizant of
that in its assessments and decision-making if it is to
be effective.

South Africa continues to advocate for a more
representative Security Council with a stronger voice for
those closer to crises, and guided by non-discriminatory
decision-making and collective interests rather than
narrow national ones. The Council should therefore
increase its engagement with Member States, especially
those affected by conflict, and be open to effective
engagement with regional and subregional institutions.

We also believe that there should be no selectivity
in the implementation of the responsibility to protect
aimed at instigating any Government change. We

reiterate that the three pillars of the responsibility to
protect are mutually supporting and non-sequential,
while emphasizing the importance of prioritizing
and meaningfully investing in the prevention of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. Furthermore, we believe that the
responsibility to protect must give priority to the
core interests of the safety and well-being of affected
civilians and populations. The responsibility to protect
must not be the narrow national interest of those who
seek intervention or who implement Security Council
mandates. Any Council mandate imposing a collective
international responsibility to protect response must
be fully respected and implemented in the letter and
spirit of its provisions rather than using the mandate as
a pretext for other motives.

We too welcome the report and its recommendations,
which reaffirm that States have the primary
responsibility to protect their populations. We also
note the recommendation that Member States appoint
a senior official to serve as national focal point for the
responsibility to protect to coordinate national activities,
share good practices and spearhead cooperation. In that
regard, South Africa has appointed a focal point on the
responsibility to protect to inform the Global Network.

That represents a clear commitment to strengthening
prevention efforts and accountability measures.

Furthermore, we also agree with the report that regional
and subregional arrangements have a unique and vitally
important role to play in the prevention of atrocity
crimes and in developing regional capacities for the
early warning and assessment of atrocity crimes.

We support the proposal whereby regional entities
and the United Nations can explore ways to improve
the transmission of information and analysis in order
to facilitate coordinated assessments and responses.

In that regard, the South African Government remains
committed to fully contributing to conflict prevention
efforts, the protection of civilians and achieving
sustainable peace within the framework of concerted
multilateralism. At the regional level, the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in partnership
with other multilateral agencies, has set up early
warning systems and directed member States to set up
national early-warning centres to monitor connectivity
and compliance.

In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support
and commitment to the implementation of the rights

and obligations under the instruments of international
human rights law and international law.