UNITED NATIONS
PRESS RELEASE

UN Special Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Children and
Armed Conflict and Special Advisor on the Prevention of Genocide urge
the Government of South Sudan to ensure accountability for sexual
violence against women and girls in Bentiu
Press Release: For Immediate Release

New York, 3 December 2018: UN Special Representatives on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Pramila Patten, for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and the
Special Advisor on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng strongly condemn
reports of 150 women and girls having been brutally raped during a ten-day period
(19-29 November) while making their way to collect food for their families near Bentiu,
South Sudan. The violations took place in a Government-controlled area, reportedly
carried out by young men in civilian clothing or military uniforms.

We reiterate the messages of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for South
Sudan, David Shearer and call on the Government of South Sudan to urgently
denounce these abhorrent acts, swiftly launch investigations and ensure that
perpetrators are prosecuted and held accountable.

Accountability is critical to obtain lasting peace and reconciliation among the
communities in South Sudan we therefore call on the Government to take all
appropriate measures to end the chronic impunity prevailing in the country. We also
call on the Government to uphold its primary responsibility for protecting and
ensuring the safety of its population, irrespective of their ethnic or political affiliation.

We further urge the Government to ensure that all victims receive essential medical,
psychosocial and legal support necessary for their recovery.

It is very disturbing that sexual violence remains rampant in the country. This year, in
particular, has been marked by an alarming increase in the number of rape cases
perpetrated on vulnerable women and girls, despite the signing of the Revitalized
Peace Agreement in September 2018.

For media inquiries, please contact:
Ms. Hajra Sana, Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
Tel: +1 212 963 2792 Email: sanah@un.org
Follow us on Twitter and Facebook: @endrapeinwar
Stephanie Tremblay, Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Tel: +1212 963 8285, Cell: +1 917 288 5791, Email: tremblay@un.org
Twitter: @childreninwar.

United Nations
H E A D Q U A RT E R S • S I E G E

Nations Unies
NEW YORK, NY 10017

T E L . : 1 ( 2 1 2 ) 9 6 3 . 1 2 3 4 • FA X : 1 ( 2 1 2 ) 9 6 3 . 4 8 7 9

United Nations Officials
condemn targeted and widespread sexual violence in South Sudan and call for the
immediate cessation of the attacks against civilians
Press Statement: For Immediate Release
(New York, 11 May 2018)
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and
the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, Adama Dieng, strongly condemn the recent
escalation of violence in former Unity state and urge all parties to end the attacks against civilians,
especially women and children.

In the last two weeks, reports from the former Unity state indicate intense fighting between Government
forces, the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and the SPLA-in Opposition (SPLA-IO) allied to
former vice-president Riek Machar. Preliminary investigations by the United Nations have uncovered
alarming patterns of serious human rights violations and abuses, including killings, pillaging, abductions,
rape and gang-rape committed by both parties during the fighting, leading to forced displacement of the
population. These violations could constitute atrocity crimes. The Government has imposed access
restrictions in most of the areas to which civilians have fled.

Sexual violence as a widespread and systematic tactic of war continues in South Sudan, reportedly to
punish civilians who are perceived to be associated with a particular political or ethnic group.

The United Nations has received reports of attackers demanding money, alcohol and cattle through
threats of violence and intimidation, including sexual violence. Testimonies indicate that women and
girls of all ages have been subjected to rape, including pregnant women, lactating mothers, and girls as
young as four years old. Information collected over the past week indicates that at least 66 women and
girls have been raped since attacks began on 21 April, with the total number of cases likely to be much
higher. In addition, dozens of women and girls are believed to have been abducted, with some having
been released after enduring days in captivity.

In former Unity state, young armed soldiers, reportedly affiliated to the SPLA, allegedly attacked the
island of Meer, where a number of civilians, including women, children and the elderly, were reportedly
killed and injured, while others, including children, drowned as they tried to escape. Instances of
abductions and sexual violence against women and girls, were also reported.

The three United Nations Officials call on all parties in South Sudan to immediately end the use of sexual
violence, cease the commission of atrocities, and hold the perpetrators of these heinous acts accountable
as a matter of priority. The three Officials urge the parties to the conflict to honor the commitments they
have made to address conflict-related sexual violence and to protect the civilian population, and further

U N I T E D N AT I O N S

N AT I O N S U N I E S

PA G E

call on the Government of South Sudan to abide by the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities,
Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access they signed in 2017. In 2014, the Government of South
Sudan signed a Joint Communiqué to end sexual violence and recommitted to an Action Plan to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children and all other grave violations against children. In 2015, the
SPLM-IO signed an Action Plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use, as well as the killing and
maiming, of children and in 2014 issued a Unilateral Communiqué on conflict-related sexual-violence.

“The United Nations stands ready to support national efforts to end, prevent and address conflict-related
sexual violence in South Sudan and to improve the protection of civilians, including children”, the three
Officials stated.

For media inquiries, please contact:
Géraldine Boezio, Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
New York. Tel: +1 917 367-3306 or geraldine.boezio@un.org
Stephanie Tremblay, Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, New York. Tel: +1 212 963-8285 or tremblay@un.org
Castro Wesamba, Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide, New York. Tel: +1
917-367-3773 or wesamba@un.org

2