(spoke in
Arabic): My country’s delegation has considered the
Secretary-General’s report contained in document
A/72/884. We reaffirm that no Member State can reject
or contest in principle some of the report’s contents
about the basic responsibility of States to protect their
citizens, and about promoting the systems related to
early warning and early action aimed at preventing
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity. However, there are reasons for
concern that have been expressed by several Member
States, specifically about the fact that some Member
States, in coordination with members of the Secretariat,
have taken an unprofessional and exclusionary approach
in order to exploit the responsibility to protect and
politicize it in a way that makes it subject to controversy
in the work of the United Nations.

We are not here today to make a political statement
or teach anyone a lesson, but we intend to speak
transparently and clearly about the realities, events,
disastrous consequences and grave crimes that the
Governments of certain States have perpetrated,
violating principles of international law and
unilaterally exploiting the concept of the responsibility
to protect without a United Nations mandate and so as
to interfere in the affairs of some States, selectively
and unjustifiably.

As a founding and responsible member of this
Organization, the Syrian Arab Republic would like
to remind all Member States that one of the reports
of former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon clearly
mentioned the serious concerns raised by the issue

of some Governments’ misuse of the concept of the
responsibility to protect and their application of it to
a particular State. Needless to say, for the past eight
years that State, which is a member of our international
Organization, has been enduring a disastrous situation.

As a result, we have seen destruction, chaos and the
deaths of thousands of its innocent citizens thanks to
military operations and aerial bombardments by the
armies of Governments that claim to be applying the
concept of the responsibility to protect by perpetrating
acts of murder, destruction and looting. Need we also
add that this same State has been enduring a terrifying
situation involving terrorism, fighting and struggles
for power. Tens of thousands of its citizens, as well as
the citizens of States in Africa, have lost their lives in
their attempt to escape the scourge of war, drowning
in the Mediterranean Sea. What kind of responsibility
to protect is it when thousands are killed, States are
destroyed and their peoples displaced under its pretext?
The preparers of the Secretary-General’s latest
report insist on flagrantly ignoring the fact that the
criteria and assurances that Member States apply in
implementing the concept of the responsibility to protect
differ greatly. They also ignore the objective criticisms
that many Member States have made about the lack
of assurances and restrictions that can ensure that the
responsibility to protect is not used as a justification
for violating States’ sovereignty and interfering in their
internal affairs, which, as we all know, have occurred
in numerous places.

The Secretariat and some Member States are still
trying to use the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
to create a fictional legal basis for the responsibility
to protect. In that regard, my country and many other
Member States believe that paragraphs 138 and 139 of
resolution 60/1 do not establish the responsibility to
protect as a principle. Rather, they underscore basic and
inherent principles behind the purposes of the United
Nations relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security, the resolve to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, to have faith in
fundamental human rights and the dignity of human
beings, to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom, and above all to respect the
sovereignty of States and refrain from interfering
in their internal affairs. What does all of this mean?
It means that the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter are above the concept of the
responsibility to protect, especially since the concept

itself is a controversial one and has not yet been adopted
as such by Member States.

Syria, together with many other Member States,
calls on the Secretariat and the Governments of States
that are striving to establish this principle as a standing
item on the General Assembly agenda to show courage
and admit that Member States differ substantially on
this concept. They must have a transparent discussion
of the genuine sources of concerns about it and admit
that the United Nations has been unable to undertake
its real responsibility to protect the Palestinian people
from the Israeli occupation and its supporters. They
must recognize that the United Nations has shown
itself unable to implement an early-warning system for
protecting Iraqis and Syrians from the acts of Da’esh,
the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations.

They must acknowledge that the United Nations has
failed to create international systems for early alerts
and cooperation in order to confront the aspect of
international terrorism known as foreign terrorist
fighters, which some Governments and intelligence
services have helped to create.

They must also recognize that the United Nations has
been unable to undertake its responsibility to protect by
addressing the crimes of the illegitimate United Statesled international coalition against the Syrian people.

According to United Nations reports, those crimes have
destroyed the cities of Raqqa and Ayn Al-Arab. They
have killed thousands of civilians in Syria and they say
that all of that is collateral damage — that destroying
cities, killing thousands and looting monuments are
collateral damage. Infrastructure, bridges and electric
and hydro-power plants have all been destroyed as a
result of collateral damage on the pretext of fighting
terrorism. When the Secretariat and the Governments
of the States that promote the responsibility to protect
in this exclusionary and selective way admit that
these consequences are part of a failure on the part
of the United Nations to respect and implement every
one of the principles and provisions of the Charter,
without exception, then we in Syria, along with many
other Member States that stand ready to respect the
principles of freedom, justice and equality in word and
deed, are ready to sit down with them at one table and
discuss the concept of the responsibility to protect in a
transparent way.

At that point, we will be willing to discuss the issue
of including this concept on the General Assembly
agenda and to reach a consensus on the concept itself, as

well as on its content and the assurances that can ensure
that it is not used for political objectives that run counter
to the principles and purposes of the United Nations
and its Charter. Without that, we would be dealing with
a bad situation marked by the political hypocrisy and
immorality that have undermined the credibility of this
international Organization ever since the invasion of
Iraq. We would also be dealing with parties that are
unwilling to defend human rights anywhere in the
world, because they are using humanitarian issues to
justify their intrusions into the affairs of other States
and disguise their military aggressions against them as
legitimate actions.

Speaking of political hypocrisy and immorality,
and in response to certain delegations regarding the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, I would say that
we cannot separate legal responsibility and moral
principles, since otherwise they would be characterized
as hypocritical. I would also say that anything built on
falsehood is false. In that regard, I would like to remind
the Assembly that this illegal Mechanism was based
on General Assembly resolution 71/248, which was not
adopted by consensus and was the outcome of an illegal
operation and procedure in which the Assembly went
beyond its mandate. The resolution blatantly infringes
on the purview and mandates of the Security Council,
as outlined in Article 12 of the Charter, and the General
Assembly has therefore created an illegal mechanism
and granted it investigative powers that it does not
itself possess.

My delegation and some other Member States
have sent several letters to the Secretary-General and
to representatives of the Member States in which we
have proved beyond any discussion or doubt that this
Mechanism is illegal. It was born dead and will stay
that way.

I would ask my colleagues to always remember that
the Government behind this illegitimate Mechanism is
the Government of a country — I am not using the word
“regime”, because it would be shameful for a diplomat
to use that under the dome of the United Nations, the
dome of international legitimacy — whose previous
Prime Minister declared publicly that the ruling family
in his country supports and finances the Al-Nusra
Front, which is classified as a terrorist organization

by the Security Council. The Government of another
country also launders money through illegal operations
carried out by its financial institutions, selling oil and
gas and then financing armed terrorist groups in my
country, Syria.

Given all of this, do member States think that
supporting this Mechanism can be considered a moral
action? Some members here in this Hall should be their
own judges with regard to the use of double standards
and selectivity. There is no need to remind them that
they are failing to fight terrorism and are deliberately
turning a blind eye to the flow of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters to Syria.

In conclusion, I want to remind the Assembly that
for an entire year the Security Council was unable
to include a terrorist entity called Hay’at Tahrir
Al-Sham — the Organization for the Liberation of the
Levant — on the list of terrorist organizations. Why?
Because the United States delegation was against that.

On the sidelines of a review of the United Nations
counter-terrorism strategy, during the informal
meetings that took place a few days ago, that same
delegation, that is, the American delegation, rejected
the inclusion of any reference in the text of any draft
resolution to be adopted by the General Assembly to
fighting the promotion of violent extremism on Internet
networks. Why? The justification was that this goes
against freedom of expression. Fighting the spread
of extremism and terrorism on Internet networks is
contradictory, in their opinion, to freedom of expression
and speech.