HRC39 Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect Statement
High-level panel discussion to commemorate the seventieth anniversary of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
13 September 2018

Mr President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

Seventy years ago, the UN General Assembly established the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide through
Resolution 260 A III. The Convention not only provides a legal definition of
genocide, but also constitutes one of the first and most significant
practical attempts by the UN to address international crimes and human
rights. Under the Convention, States undertake to prevent and punish acts
of genocide, regardless of whether they have been committed in
peacetime or during armed conflict. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court further affirms that the most serious crimes of international
concern, including genocide, must not go unpunished and that their
effective prosecution must be ensured.

Despite the celebration of the seventieth anniversary of the Genocide
Convention later this year, over the last seven decades acts of genocide
have still occurred. The 100 days of slaughter in Rwanda in 1994, killing
more than 800,000 men, women and children, and the massacre at
Srebrenica, both demonstrate the ongoing need to prevent and punish
genocide.

Despite efforts to learn from the past and better prevent mass atrocity
crimes, ongoing serious violations and abuses of international law
highlight the need to bridge the gap between words and deeds, and to
uphold our shared responsibilities.

It is clear that there is a growing body of evidence of terrible crimes
committed against the Yazidi in northern Iraq, four years after these
atrocious events took place. This August marked the first anniversary of
the 25 August ARSA attacks in Myanmar and
the horrific and
disproportionate response of the Myanmar security forces. According to
the HRC’s Independent International Fact Finding Mission, there is
sufficient information to warrant the investigation and prosecution of
senior members of the Tatmadaw/Burmese military in the Tatmadaw
chain of command, so that a competent court can determine their liability
for genocide in relation to the situation in Rakhine State.

Mr President,

One of the most significant efforts to transform the sentiment of “never
again” into meaningful action was the unanimous adoption of the principle
of the Responsibility to Protect, whereby states unanimously committed to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing, as set out in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document. The primary responsibility for protecting a population from
genocide and other mass atrocities lies with that population’s
government. Where national authorities are manifestly failing to protect
their population from such atrocities, the international community has a
responsibility to act.

We strongly believe that the Human Rights Council and all Geneva-based
human rights mechanisms are particularly well suited to recognise the
early warning signs of genocide and other mass atrocity crimes. This
includes focusing on country-specific situations where States may be
unable or unwilling to protect their populations and establishing
monitoring and/or investigative mechanisms as well as offering technical
assistance, capacity building and access to special procedure mechanisms,
within their mandates. All of these measures are critical to achieve
effective and early action aimed at preventing genocide and other mass
atrocities.

In this regard, we wish to highlight the crucial role of the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparations and guarantees
of non-recurrence, whose work is an essential contribution to seek truth,
ensure accountability and promote reconciliation, all of which are essential
for the prevention of genocide and other mass atrocities.

We further wish to highlight the crucial role of the UN Office on Genocide
Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, and applaud the Special
Adviser to the Secretary General on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr.

Adama Dieng, for his tireless efforts to promote and defend the principles
enshrined in the Genocide Convention. We therefore urge all member
states to continue and strengthen their cooperation with the Special
Advisor’s Office, as well as with all other relevant UN bodies. We would
also like to call for all member states to urge the UN Secretary-General to
progress the appointment of a new Special Adviser on the Responsibility
to Protect.

Mr President,
As was noted in Resolution 37/26 on the Prevention of Genocide from 6
April 2018, “further international cooperation is required to facilitate the
timely prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide”. In this
context, we call upon all member states to sign and ratify the Genocide
Convention and, where applicable, enact relevant national legislation.

Resolution 37/26 further reiterated the responsibility of each State to
protect its population from genocide through appropriate and necessary
means. Such means may include the establishment of national institutions
focusing on mass atrocity prevention and the appointment of national
Focal Points on the prevention of genocide, which are already engaging in
dialogue and the exchange of best practices on an international level. We
encourage Member States who have not done so to consider appointing
such an R2P Focal Point and help promote genocide prevention at the
national, regional and international level.

We also stress the importance of ending impunity for perpetrators of
genocide and mass atrocities. Accountability provides a glimpse of justice
for victims of atrocity crimes, and helps prevent their recurrence.

Therefore, we wish to call upon all member states to continue to
investigative and prosecute those responsible for grave breaches of
international law and, where applicable, cooperate with the International
Criminal Court.

Mr President,
Protecting populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing is our individual and collective
responsibility. The best way to uphold that responsibility and to honour
the Genocide Convention is by consistently holding perpetrators to
account and meaningfully preventing future atrocities.

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the
Secretary-General
11 September 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of members of the Group of Friends of
the Responsibility to Protect.

Together we would like to express our deep gratitude and admiration for the outgoing High
Commissioner, who fought tirelessly to promote and protect human rights, gave a voice to
millions of victims of large-scale human rights violations and abuses, and played a
fundamental role in stressing states’ individual and shared responsibility to protect
populations from mass atrocity crimes.

We call upon the new High Commissioner, in accordance with her mandate, to continue
highlighting gross human rights violations and abuses, which often times serve as early
warning signs of situations that may escalate into mass atrocity crimes.

Mr President,
Thirteen years ago the international community unanimously endorsed the responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic
cleansing. Geneva-based human rights mechanisms often lay the ground for the prevention
of mass atrocity crimes by speaking out and acting upon widespread violations and abuses of
human rights. We therefore wish to highlight the importance of a more systematic
integration of human rights into conflict and atrocity prevention agendas.

In this regard, the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council are exceptionally well
suited to highlight early warning signs and provide information on potential and current
mass atrocity situations. In particular, their advocacy and awareness-raising activities for
both thematic and country-specific issues allow for the effective and timely responses to
large-scale human rights violations. We encourage the Special Procedures mechanisms to
highlight mass atrocity risks in their annual reports presented to the Human Rights Council,
and further emphasize the importance of regular briefings, within their mandate, to the UN
Security Council.

In addition, the Human Rights Council and its procedures plays a crucial role in
strengthening states’ individual efforts to prevent mass atrocity crimes. By providing
technical assistance and capacity building measures, states are able to strengthen respect for
the rule of law and good governance and consolidate effective and accountable national
institutions, which are key elements for effective atrocity prevention.

We further welcome the work of the Human Rights Council’s ongoing investigation
mechanisms as well as other Mechanisms. Such investigative mechanisms allow the Human
Rights Council to respond to situations of serious violations of international law, promoting
accountability and fighting impunity. Ensuring accountability for mass atrocity crimes also
plays a fundamental role in preventing their recurrence.

Mr President,
Ongoing conflict and atrocities around the world demonstrate the need for greater attention
on the linkages between the prevention of mass atrocity crimes, which often times arise from
long standing and widespread violations of human rights, and the maintenance of

international peace and security. Human rights violations and mass atrocity crimes are both
also often times a result of failures of maintaining the rule of law and development, including
discrimination, lack of good governance and radicalisation.

In this respect, we wish to express our strong commitment to the Secretary General’s Human
Rights Up Front among other efforts to strengthen ties between peace and security,
development and human rights. Emphasizing the need for greater cooperation between
various UN agencies and organs will allow for a more holistic, effective and timely response
to persistent and widespread human rights violations and situations at risk of mass atrocity
crimes.

Mr President,
The current displacement of over 65 million people due to conflict, violence and atrocities
demonstrates the need for a strong and consolidated commitment of the international
community to adhere to the international rule of law. As such, we are ready and committed to
assist member states in upholding their primary responsibility to protect populations from
mass atrocity crimes. We must also ensure that those responsible for mass atrocity crimes are
brought to justice.

HRC38 Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect Statement re: Item 10
Panel Discussion on Human Rights and the Sustainable Development Goals
4 July 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect.

We welcome this discussion on the complementary and mutually-reinforcing relationship
between human rights, peace and security and the Sustainable Development Goals, and the
role UN human rights mechanisms can play in contributing to the achievement of the SDGs.

Realisation of the SDGs will not be possible without addressing human rights violations that
persist in many places around the world. Too many times we have seen a State’s
development not only hindered, but reversed by ethnic cleansing, genocide, war crimes
and/or crimes against humanity.

Widespread and systematic violations of human rights, including marginalisation of and
discrimination against specific groups or individuals, often serve as an early warning of the
potential for such crimes. Violations and discrimination faced by women and girls not only
show disregard for the international principles of non-discrimination and equality, but also
prevent states from reaching their targets under the SDG agenda.

The principles of R2P are well established. These principles empower States to take action,
consistent with international law, to prevent atrocity crimes. The toolbox for such action is
wide-ranging. Pursuit of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development – which promotes
the idea of ‘leaving no one behind’ and envisages a world free of fear and violence – is a key
part of that toolbox.

As the head of UNDP recently noted, many of the underlying causes for invoking R2P can be
found in failures of development. These include failures of governance, discrimination and
forms of radicalisation that lead to conflict.

Addressing these failures and building more resilient societies are critical elements of States’
efforts to prevent atrocity crimes. They require, among other things, respect for the rule of
law and respect, protection and fulfilment of all human rights without discrimination.

Legitimate and accountable national institutions, good governance, and an approach that
supports diversity, a strong civil society and a pluralistic media are key.

The link between the SDGs and such resilience is clear. Goal 16 specifically addresses the
promotion of peaceful, just and inclusive societies by providing access to justice for all and
building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions. Goal 4 addresses the importance
of ensuring inclusive and quality education, an essential objective for improving the lives of
future generations and building cohesive societies.

Bringing an end to human rights violations and atrocity crimes, and ensuring transitional
justice, accountability and non-recurrence, is essential for investing in the kind of social
renewal and institutional capacity-building essential to the achievement of the SDGs.

That is why today we stress the key role of the Human Rights Council and other UN Human
Rights mechanisms in supporting technical assistance and capacity-building work towards
the prevention of atrocity crimes. The second pillar of the Responsibility to Protect
highlights that “The international community has a responsibility to encourage and assist
States in fulfilling this responsibility”.

We wish to underline the importance of technical cooperation, aimed at assisting States,
upon their request, in building and strengthening national capacities that have a direct
impact on the observance, respect and enjoyment of human rights by everyone.

The activities undertaken through OHCHR’s field presences can contribute to assisting
States to take appropriate legislative, administrative and other measures, to prevent human
rights violations and their potential escalation into atrocity crimes or conflict. The
integration of a human rights perspective into the work of UN Country Teams and United
Nations peace missions, within their respective mandates, is important for the prevention of
gross violations of human rights that can potentially lead to atrocity crimes.

We urge the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to strengthen
this preventative capacity, and we encourage states to fully cooperate with the Council, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Special procedures mandate
holders.

HRC38 Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect Statement re: Item 10
Panel Discussion on Human Rights and the Sustainable Development Goals
4 July 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect.

We welcome this discussion on the complementary and mutually-reinforcing relationship
between human rights, peace and security and the Sustainable Development Goals, and the
role UN human rights mechanisms can play in contributing to the achievement of the SDGs.

Realisation of the SDGs will not be possible without addressing human rights violations that
persist in many places around the world. Too many times we have seen a State’s development
not only hindered, but reversed by ethnic cleansing, genocide, war crimes and/or crimes
against humanity.

Widespread and systematic violations of human rights, including marginalisation of and
discrimination against specific groups or individuals, often serve as an early warning of the
potential for such crimes. Violations and discrimination faced by women and girls not only
show disregard for the international principles of non-discrimination and equality, but also
prevent states from reaching their targets under the SDG agenda.

The principles of R2P are well established. These principles empower States to take action,
consistent with international law, to prevent atrocity crimes. The toolbox for such action is
wide-ranging. Pursuit of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development – which promotes
the idea of ‘leaving no one behind’ and envisages a world free of fear and violence – is a key
part of that toolbox.

As the head of UNDP recently noted, many of the underlying causes for invoking R2P can be
found in failures of development. These include failures of governance, discrimination and
forms of radicalisation that lead to conflict.

Addressing these failures and building more resilient societies are critical elements of States’
efforts to prevent atrocity crimes. They require, among other things, respect for the rule of
law and respect, protection and fulfilment of all human rights without discrimination.

Legitimate and accountable national institutions, good governance, and an approach that
supports diversity, a strong civil society and a pluralistic media are key.

The link between the SDGs and such resilience is clear. Goal 16 specifically addresses the
promotion of peaceful, just and inclusive societies by providing access to justice for all and
building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions. Goal 4 addresses the importance of
ensuring inclusive and quality education, an essential objective for improving the lives of
future generations and building cohesive societies.

Bringing an end to human rights violations and atrocity crimes, and ensuring transitional
justice, accountability and non-recurrence, is essential for investing in the kind of social
renewal and institutional capacity-building essential to the achievement of the SDGs.

That is why today we stress the key role of the Human Rights Council and other UN Human
Rights mechanisms in supporting technical assistance and capacity-building work towards
the prevention of atrocity crimes. The second pillar of the Responsibility to Protect highlights
that “The international community has a responsibility to encourage and assist States in
fulfilling this responsibility”.

We wish to underline the importance of technical cooperation, aimed at assisting States,
upon their request, in building and strengthening national capacities that have a direct
impact on the observance, respect and enjoyment of human rights by everyone.

The activities undertaken through OHCHR’s field presences can contribute to assisting States
to take appropriate legislative, administrative and other measures, to prevent human rights
violations and their potential escalation into atrocity crimes or conflict. The integration of a
human rights perspective into the work of UN Country Teams and United Nations peace
missions, within their respective mandates, is important for the prevention of gross
violations of human rights that can potentially lead to atrocity crimes.

We urge the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to strengthen
this preventative capacity, and we encourage states to fully cooperate with the Council, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, and Special procedures mandate
holders.

i
t

STATEMENT

ON BEHALF OF

The Group of Friends on
the Responsibility to Protect

DELIVERED BY

Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed S, Al-Thani
Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar
to the United Nations

BEFORE

The Formal Debate of the United Nations General Assembly
ON

The Responsivity to Protect and the Prevention of

Genocide War Crimes Ethnic Cleansing and Crimes
Against Humanity
UN Headquarters - New York
25 June 2018

P/ease check against delivery

Permanent Mission of the State of Qatar to the United Nations
809 UN Plaza, 4^ Fl., New York, NY 10017 - Tel: 212-486-9335 - Fax: 212-758-4952

Mr. President

I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Responsibility to Protect, consisting of 50 Member States and the European Union, and cochaired this year by Italy and the State of Qatar.

We would like to thank the President ofthe General Assembly and the Secretary-General for

their statements and Australia and Ghana for their leadership in including the responsibility
to protect on the agenda of this UNGA. We would like also to thank the Secretary-General

for his report entitled "The Responsibility to Protect: From Eariy Warning to Early Action".

We commend his prioritization of early warning and early action to prevent genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and for recognizing that R2P is a key
element of this important agenda. We welcome the report's recommendations and
encourage Member States to implement them.

The commitment made by all UN Member States to R2P at the World Summit in 2005 was

historic. The Group of Friends reaffirms its strong commitment to paragraph 138, 139 and
140 of the World Summit Outcome Document and the three pillars of R2P.

Today marks the first UN General Assembly formal debate on the Responsibility to Protect
since 2009. The inclusion of R2P on the formal agenda of the General Assembly reflects the
will of the wider UN membership to the prevention of genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity and ethnic cleansing. We urge the UN membership to consider the merits of the
permanent inclusion of this item on the UNGA formal agenda. Continued dialogue in the
General Assembly will promote the building of consensus in relation to what the
international community can do to prevent these heinous crimes.

Mr. President,

The acceptance of R2P through the World Summit Outcome Document remains a key
commitment of the international community to protect populations that face the threat of

genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and ethnic cleansing. At this time, the Group

would like to reiterate its common understanding that the responsibility to protect
reinforces, rather than undermines, State sovereignty. As the Secretary-General underlined in

the presentation of his priorities to the General Assembly earlier this year, it is necessary to
"overcome the false contradiction between human rights and national sovereignty. Human

rights and national sovereignty go hand in hand. The achievement of human rights
strengthens States and societies, thereby reinforcing sovereignty. States with effective,
accountable institutions are among .the best defenders of human rights."
Since 2005, considerable progress has been made by the UN, Member States and other

stakeholders, including civil society, in operationalizing our commitment to R2P at the
national, regional and international levels. International and national actors have been

successful in creating frameworks for identifying risks, developing early warning mechanisms,
articulating inhibitors of atrocity crimes and creating new institutional mechanisms. Today's
formal debate gives States an important opportunity to share national experiences and best
practices and effective strategies for preventing atrocities.

Over the past decade, we have seen the creation and expansion of the Group of Friends on
R2P in both New York and Geneva, the establishment and growth of the Global Network of

R2P Focal Points, the inclusion of R2P in at least 69 Security Council Resolutions, including
in the mandates of a number of UN Peace Operations, and in resolutions of the Human

Rights Council. Important initiatives like the Code of Conduct regarding Security Council
action against genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes, the Framework ofAnalysis

for Atrocity Crimes and Human Rights Up Front have supported efforts to prevent atrocity
crimes and continue to serve as important tools for mainstreaming atrocity prevention and
strengthening prevention capacities.

The prevention of atrocities is at the core of each of the three pillars of R2P, and Member
States should better utilize the entire UN system to effectively prevent and respond to their
perpetration. As the 2018 report of the Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect
suggests, we should make a concerted effort to continue to report on progress towards
implementation of the responsibility to protect and bring situations of imminent risk of
atrocity crimes to the attention of the General Assembly, Security Council, and Human

Rights Council, as needed. For example, the Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic
Review is well placed to support preventive efforts, and we encourage Member States to
better utilize the UPR processes as a preventive mechanism. This year we mark the 70th

anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was created in response to

violent conflict in order to prevent future violent conflicts. As well as embodying the
international community's commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights for
all individuals around the world, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the treaties
that derive from it, are, in the words of the Secretary General, the "best prevention tool we
have".

The General Assembly should also play a more active role in supporting States in their

efforts to carry out their primary responsibility to protect their populations. The Security
Council should consider situations where there is potential for mass atrocities at the earliest
possible stage, including through utilizing working methods such as situational awareness
briefings and Arria-Formula meetings.

We also strongly emphasize the role of women in the prevention of atrocity crimes, as they
are crucial for early warning and peacebuilding, promoting cooperation, capacity building,
and the creation of more cohesive and inclusive societies. We should take concrete steps to
end all forms of discrimination on the basis of gender and to empower women as agents of
atrocity prevention, including by ensuring that all girls have equal access to quality
education.

As recognized in the Secretary General's report mobilization of all resources at our disposal
is required and broadening the constituency of actors engaged in atrocity prevention is
needed. In this respect we specifically welcome recent efforts by the General Assembly and
Security Council to recognize and promote the participation of youth in conflict prevention
and resolution.

Accountability for the perpetrators of atrocity crimes is among the most effective ways of
preventing recurrence. States have the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
international crimes committed within their jurisdiction and national accountability efforts

should be encouraged and supported, including through the strengthening of judicial
cooperation between States.

We urge States to comply with their international legal obligations and thoroughly
investigate and prosecute persons responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes, or other serious violations of international law, as well as to strengthen Judicial
cooperation with other States for this purpose. International investigative mechanisms,
including fact-finding missions and commissions of inquiry, can support efforts to promote

accountability and bring situations of concern to the attention of States. Additionally,
international courts and hybrid tribunals, including the International Criminal Court, provide
complementary avenues in appropriate circumstances to enable accountability.

We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for the United Nations Office on Genocide

Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect, and we encourage the Secretary-General to
appoint a Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect. The Special Adviser and the Joint
Office have a key role in assisting Member States in the operationalization of R2P.

We reiterate the significance of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the

Crime of Genocide as an effective international instrument for the prevention and
punishment of the crime of genocide. To mark the 70th anniversary of the adoption of the
Genocide Convention on 9 December 2018, the Special Adviser on the Prevention of

Genocide has launched an appeal for its universal ratification, which is supported by the
Secretary-General. We strongly encourage States that have not yet ratified or acceded to the
Convention to consider doing so as a matter of high priority and to ensure its

implementation at the national level. Ratifying and complying with the Convention is an
affirmation of the commitment of "never again".

We recognize the important role national and international civil society can play in
supporting the further advancement and implementation of R2P. In particular, we would like
to thank the Global Centre for the Responsibility to Protect for their invaluable work as
Secretariat of the Group of Friends, both in New York and Geneva.

Mr. President,

At a time when more than 68.5 million people are displaced as a result of armed conflict,

atrocities and persecution worldwide, we hope that during this debate we can collectively
identify implementable strategies that can effectively prevent atrocities and protect
populations around the world from atrocities.

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Statement on Item 2 - Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and reports of the Office of the High Commissioner and the
Secretary-General
19 June 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honor to deliver this statement on behalf of the 51 members of the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

We thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights for his tireless efforts to promote
and protect human rights and for his strong voice on situations where his Office observed
evidence of alleged atrocities. We call upon the next High Commissioner, in accordance
with his or her mandate, to continue highlighting gross human rights violations and
abuses and assisting the international community to fulfill its responsibility to protect and
prevent atrocities.

The reports and updates of the High Commissioner and his Office, as well as of special
procedures mandate-holders, can constitute early warning tools that should prompt States
to prevent genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing both
nationally and internationally. By addressing specific situations of concern, reviewing the
human rights situations in States via the Universal Periodic Review, and making
recommendations for action, the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms also play an
important role in advancing the prevention of mass atrocities.

Mr. President,
Later this year the international community will observe the seventieth anniversaries of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, as well as the twentieth anniversary of the Rome
Statute. Respect for the rule of law is especially important at a time when the basic tenets
of international law are being violated by state and non-state actors.

As we reflect upon the international community’s efforts to uphold the Universal
Declaration and the Genocide Convention, we acknowledge the important role played by
human rights mechanisms and independent investigations mandated by this Council in
documenting gross violations and abuses of human rights, identifying those responsible,
and offering options to address them and prevent them from reoccurring.

In that regard, the Group of Friends of R2P notes the Human Rights Council’s attention
at its 38th session to the situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar, the situation in Syria, and
the situation in the Kasai regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Mr. President,

Nearly 66 million people are currently displaced by conflict, persecution and mass
atrocities. As the international community faces this global refugee and displacement
crisis, we have witnessed worrying rising signs of xenophobia and incitement to violence
based upon identity. As the UN Framework of Analysis for mass atrocity crimes notes,
discriminatory and exclusionary practices or policies, as well as acts of incitement or hate
propaganda targeting particular groups or individuals, may serve as a warning sign of
mass atrocity risks. We acknowledge the preventative role of human rights mechanisms,
including special procedures mandate-holders, in raising awareness of these risks in
accordance with their mandates and encourage Member States to highlight national best
practices for addressing racism, racial discrimination and rising levels of xenophobia and
incitement to hate crimes while fully respecting human rights in their submissions to the
Universal Periodic Review.

Mr. President,
The Group of Friends of R2P welcomes next week’s General Assembly Debate on the
Responsibility to Protect and the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing,
and crimes against humanity. We call on Member States to consider the formal inclusion
of the Responsibility to Protect, including its full implementation, on the agenda of the
UN General Assembly to enable its continued consideration in accordance with General
Assembly resolution A/RES/63/308. We further welcome the 10th annual report of the
Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect, “From early warning to early action,”
and strongly encourage Member States to highlight the critical role that the High
Commissioner, the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms can play in providing
early warning and mobilizing a response in accordance to their mandates.

The international community should continue to prioritise early warning and early action
on preventing human rights violations and violent conflict in accordance with the UN
Charter.

STATEMENT
ON BEHALF OF

The Group of Friends on
the Responsibility to Protect
DELIVERED BY

Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed S. Al-Thani
Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar
to the United Nations
BEFORE

The Open Debate of the United Nations Security Council
ON

Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict
UN Headquarters - New York
22 May 2018

Please check against delivery

Permanent Mission of the State of Qatar to the United Nations
809 UN Plaza, 4th Fl., New York, NY 10017 - Tel: 212-486-9335 - Fax: 212-758-4952

Madam President,
I have the honor of delivering this statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Responsibility to Protect, consisting of 50 Member States
and the European Union, and co-chaired this year by Italy and the State of
Qatar.

The Group would like to thank Poland for organizing today’s
important Open Debate. I also would like to extend our gratitude to
Secretary-General António Guterres, to the Director-General of the ICRC,
Mr. Yves Daccord, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association for their highly informative briefings.

Madam President,
Today we bear witness to a continuing and pervasive degradation of
respect for civilian lives and an appalling disregard for the norms and laws
that the international community established to alleviate the effects of
armed conflict. The results are tremendous human suffering and a high risk
of mass atrocity crimes. Although all States have a responsibility to protect
their populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing, more than 65 million people are currently displaced as a
result of conflict, atrocities and persecution worldwide. The commission
of systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of applicable
international humanitarian law and human rights law in situations of armed
conflict may constitute a threat to international peace and security.

It is within this context that the Group of Friends would like to stress
the following points:
Firstly, full and effective compliance with international law is
fundamental to the protection of civilians. Many civilian deaths, as well as
suffering and displacement, could be avoided if all parties to conflicts
respected international humanitarian law and human rights law.

Secondly, it is of the utmost importance that States put in place
appropriate legislative and institutional arrangements to comprehensively
address violations of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights, and hold those who commit such violations and
abuses accountable. Accountability for serious violations of the law of
armed conflict and human rights violations and abuses not only helps
provide justice for victims, but also deters future violations and abuses.

1

States have the primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
crimes committed within their jurisdiction, and national accountability
efforts should be encouraged and supported, including through the
strengthening of judicial cooperation between states. International
investigative and judicial mechanisms, including fact-finding missions,
commissions of inquiry, international courts and hybrid tribunals —
including the International Criminal Court in circumstances that are
properly within its jurisdiction —provide complementary avenues to
enable accountability when and where national options prove insufficient.

Thirdly, we are witnessing widespread attacks directed against
civilian infrastructure, such as healthcare facilities and schools. Let’s not
forget that deliberate or indiscriminate attacks against medical facilities
and civilian infrastructures such as schools, as well as on the civilian
population, including humanitarian workers, may amount to war crimes.

In recent years, there has been a pattern of attacks on schools,
students, teachers and other education personnel by state security forces or
non-state armed groups. In 2016, the UN was able to verify 753 attacks on
schools and hospitals. From May 2016 to today, the ICRC has registered
in 16 countries alone over 1,200 incidents of violence against healthcare
facilities or personnel. Practically, an incident of violence against
healthcare facilities or personnel has taken place every single week since
the passage of UN Security Council Resolution 2286, regarding the
protection of medical and humanitarian personnel and facilities.

Fourthly, protection of civilians should be sensitive to gender
considerations. Security Council resolutions on Women, Peace and
Security note that armed conflict and emergencies have a differential
impact on women, girls, men and boys. Women’s needs must be
considered and addressed. The Group urges the United Nations and other
relevant actors to ensure that affected populations, including women, are
involved in the development of protection of civilians strategies and
activities.

Lastly, journalists play an important role in bringing attention to
conflict situations and mobilizing action in situations where atrocity crimes
are committed. Independent reporting can put pressure on political actors
to find solutions to conflicts and can contribute to promoting
accountability. According to Reporters without Borders, more than 1,000
professional journalists have been killed in the past 15 years - with an
2

average of two deaths per week, and more than 24 already killed in 2018.

Member states should create and maintain a safe and enabling environment
for journalists reporting in conflict situations.

Madam President,
Far too many civilians are killed in both direct and indiscriminate
attacks in today’s complex and protracted conflicts. The international
community should make every effort to assist civilians caught up in these
conflicts. The Members of the Security Council should take timely and
decisive action aimed at ending and preventing atrocities and not hinder
credible efforts to this end.

Finally, the surest way to protect civilian populations is by investing
in the prevention of conflict and peaceful settlements of dispute, based on
the principles of justice and international law.

Statement by the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect re: HRC Item 2
Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and reports
of the Office of the High Commissioner and the Secretary-General
8 March 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 51 members of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect.

We thank the High Commissioner and his Office for their tireless efforts to promote and protect
human rights. The reports and regular updates of the High Commissioner are of fundamental
importance to shed light on violations and abuses of human rights, which, if not tackled effectively and
immediately, may reach the level of mass atrocities. The work of OHCHR can play an essential role in
early warning and contribute to the prevention of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing. We therefore strongly encourage the High Commissioner and his Office to continue
assisting the international community to fulfil its responsibility to protect and to prevent mass atrocity
crimes in accordance with his mandate.

We further call upon the High Commissioner to continue highlighting gross human rights violations,
which is crucial in ensuring the international community puts human rights up front and can help us
to mobilize action when we see an emerging risk of mass atrocities.

The UN Human Rights Council and its mechanisms provide additional opportunities for preventive
action including through highlighting country-specific and thematic situations of concern and
strengthening the compliance of States with their obligations under international human rights law. In
addition, technical assistance and capacity building can allow states to build sustainable security
situations and strengthen their resilience to risk of mass atrocities.

The various mechanisms also play a crucial role in the aftermath of mass atrocity crimes. They provide
the basis for accountability processes which may help deter the recurrence of mass atrocities and
related crimes and can play a significant role in providing access to truth as well as, potentially, justice,
reconciliation and healing.

Mr. President,
The Secretary General’s focus on prevention highlights the intrinsic link between the work of the
Human Rights Council and its mechanisms and the prevention of mass atrocity crimes. In that regard,
we strongly encourage the Council to deepen its engagement with the Joint Office for the Prevention of
Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect, and to make use of the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity
Crimes as appropriate, which is a useful tool for monitoring situations of risk.

The Group of Friends of RtoP welcomes the inclusion of RtoP in the agenda of the 72nd General
Assembly, which is an important step in advancing and promoting RtoP in the UN system.

Mr. President,
The annual reports provided by the High Commissioner play a critical role in raising awareness and
speaking out on violations and abuses of human rights. The international community should make use
of this information and engage in better and more timely preventive action in accordance with the UN
Charter.

Group of Friends of R2P Geneva
Interactive dialogue on the joint study of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence and
the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide on
the contribution of transitional justice to the prevention of gross violations and
abuses of human rights and serious violations of international humanitarian
law, including genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, and their recurrence.

2 March 2018
Mr. President,
I have the honor to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of R2P.

We thank the Special Rapporteur and the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for their
substantive joint study.

Preventing genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing is the raison
d’être of R2P. The report underlines that violations and abuses of human rights can lead to
atrocities and related crimes. We appreciate the unpacking in the joint study of the objectives
of atrocity prevention and the place of transitional justice processes in this context.

We also appreciate the many examples of the usefulness of the Framework of Analysis for
Atrocity Crimes, produced by the Joint Office for Genocide Prevention and the
Responsibility to Protect.

Mr. Special Rapporteur, Mr. Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
You note that expertise on prevention is scattered across various disciplines. You propose a
framework approach in order to strengthen upstream prevention. How should the UN go
about it and what role do you propose for the HRC?
You recommend a joint assessment of the vulnerability of each country to atrocities at the
country level. We acknowledge that this recommendation is sensitive to the fact that each
situation is context-specific. Likewise, you recommend that a comprehensive prevention
framework should be developed. In practice, which entity within the UN system
should have the lead, especially if this recommendation is not universally
accepted by states? Is there merit in assisting States in assessing their
vulnerability to atrocities?
Thank you