Muchas gracias. Mr. President,
The 2005 Outcome Document, which reflects the commitment of Heads of State and
Government, enshrines in a concept known as “RtoP” all the international obligations of States
with regard to the protection of individuals. RtoP is an essential obligation of States in
accordance with human rights law, international humanitarian law and the law of refugeesMr. President,
Argentina supports the concept of the responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, having in mind the primary responsibility
of States to prevent the occurence of such crimes and the responsibility of the international
community to act through the United Nations in a timely and decisive manner.

Chapter VII of the Charter grants the Seciiity Council the power to adopt coercive measuresBut such measures even conceived as the ultima ratio —in particular the use of armed force-, led
to certain uneasiness with Pillar IllAfter the use of force authorized by the Security Council in Libya by virtue of Security Council
Resolution 1973 (2011), a necessary discussion on Pillar Ill of the RtoP arose in the form of a
document presented by Brazil on the “Responsibility while Protecting” (A/66/551-S/201 1/701)The concerns risen by the coercive action in Libya include resorting to the use of force without
trying other measures first, regime change, the adequacy of air strikes to protect civilians, the
need for the Security Council to do a follow up of the authorized measures and accountability of
those authorized to use armed force. Those reservations and concerns must be addressed in
order to ensure that action by the United Nations does not cause more victims than civilians
protected, that it does not incurr in legitimizing political objectives beyond those of the
Organization and, in the end, to ensure the legitimacy of collective action by the United Nations.

Sefior Presidente,
1 would like to highlight the need for Pillars | and II to be operate effectively so as to render
coercive measures unnessary. Pillars | and Il refer to prevention, which requires coordination
among agencies and offices of the United Nations, but it also requires taking into account and
incorporating to the coordinated efforts the work of regional or subregional organizations and
mechanismsSeveral organizations and mechanisms of this kind work cooperatively in different regions of the
world aiming at creating early warning networks and building the capacity of national and/or
regional officials. In April 2012, the Latin-American Network for the Prevention of Genocide and
Mass Atrocities was launched with the cooperation of the Auschwitz Institute. The purpose of the Network is to prevent the commission of genocide and mass atrocities through the
cooperation of 18 Latin-American countries. By virtue of the Network, officials of those countries
will be trained and focal points will be appointed aiming at the coordination of policies and the
exchange of information. The launching of the Network was supported by the Office of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and was attended by officials of the Office of the
Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.

Also, in conjuction with Switzerland and Tanzania, Argentina is organizing a series of regional
seminars on the prevention of Genocide. The next one will take place in Cambodia, in 2013Mr. President,
1 would also like to underscore that all forms of the exercise of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court and its mere existence -not only the possibility of a Security
Council referral- makes the clear statement that the most serious crimes of international
concern are unacceptable. Thus, the ICC entails an important contribution to deterring from,
and therefore, to the preventing the commission of such crimesMr. President,
Argentina is convinced that as it is necessary to address the concerns raised regarding Pillar Ill,
there is still much work to do on prevention. The close link between early warning and
prevention, and the role of regional or subregional mechanisms to make cooperation in this
regard effective was addressed in previous dialogues. Argentina favours a deeper examination
of the role that such mechanisms can play and would like to suggest the possibility of having a
future Report of the Secretary General on the relationship between early warning and capacity-
building for prevention and the role of regional and subregional mechanismsMr. President,
| would finally like to welcome the appointment of Mr. Adama Dieng as Special Adviser of the
Secretary General on the Prevention of Genocide and recogne the work of Mr. Francis Deng
and Mr. Edward Luck in the past yeaars