General Assembly Debate Statement: Belgium
Unofficial Transcription from webcast
Belgium completely associates itself with the statement of the European Union.

The recent report of the Secretary-General is in our view satisfactory because it outlines the foundation and the
contours of the concept of R2P. I will confine myself to two points. The first is related to the international
situation: we find it profoundly shocking to see that the international community has not, to date, been in a
position to shoulder its responsibility to protect civilian populations massacred day after day by the Syrian
regime. Must we recall here once again that primary responsibility for this protection resides with the Syrian
authorities, whereas they are going so far as to use artillery, helicopters to bomb their own population.

The responsibility to protect against the gravest violations cannot thus be disqualified. Quite the contrary this
unacceptable and incomprehensible blocking, as far as world public opinion is concerned, reminds us of the
responsibility to protect to which we have collectively committed ourselves in 2005, need we recall. And more
than ever before this is a concept for our day. After Srebrenica and Rwanda we do not want to see the
international community have to ask for forgiveness once again for not having done what it should to protect
civilians, who are today victims of the most heinous crimes. Inaction, as far as we see it, is not an option.

My second point, colleagues, I’d like to welcome the assertion by the Secretary General of certain aspects that
my delegation deems to be particularly important when we talk about R2P. First, reaffirmation that every state
has an inherent responsibility to protect. Second the assertion that the question that arises is really one of seeing
how to achieve this objective in given specific circumstances. And third, that there is no particular rite of
passage from one pillar to the next, but rather that they mutually reinforce each other. Furthermore, the
Secretary General has very usefully recalled that the objective of the third pillar is not to substitute for the
failing state but rather to provide conditions conducive to that state once again assuming its responsibility, or to
convince that state to exercise its responsibility vis-à-vis its population. And lastly, it’s important for us to
recall, as does the Secretary General, that the Security Council must continue to respond flexibly to the need to
protect populations from crimes that are covered by the concept of R2P with all the latitude granted him by the
Charter.

And in conclusion, Mr. Moderator, my delegation expresses its thanks to the special advisors Mr. Deng and Mr.

Ed Luck for their important work done with regards to the concept of responsibility to protect and their essential
role. Lastly my delegation wants to wish Mr. Dieng and the moderator every success in the new responsibilities
ahead, we assure you of our fullest support. Thank you.

IN
(Http://www.belgium.be/en/newyorkun/)

Other official information and services: www.belgium.be (http://www.belgium.be/en)

informal interactive debate on the Responsibility to Protect
Date: 05 September 2012

informal interactive debate on the Responsibility to Protect
Belgium fully supports the EU statement.

The recent report of the SG is very satisfying to our eyes, in that it reaffirms, especially at a time
appropriate, the foundations and contours of the concept of responsibility to protect.

I limit myself to two points:
The first, in conjunction with international events: it is deeply shocking that the community
International has not been able, to date, to assume its responsibility to protect civilians
massacred day after day by the Syrian regime. Must we recall here that the primary responsibility for
this protection should be based on the Syrian authorities, so that they are up to use airplanes to
bomb their own people? This does not imply that the responsibility to protect in
As a concept offering policy framework to prevent or take action against the most serious violations or
disqualified right to be counted among our lost illusions.

On the contrary, this situation of blockage, unacceptable and incomprehensible to the world public opinion,
reminds us forcefully the relevance of the responsibility to protect, which we
collectively committed in 2005. More than ever, it is a concept for our time (as written by the
UNSG). We do not want that after Srebrenica and Rwanda, the international community should once
more ask forgiveness for not doing what it should have done to protect civilians who are now
victims of the most serious crimes. Inaction is not an option.

Secondly, I welcome the reaffirmation by the SG, aspects that my delegation considers
especially important when we talk about responsibility to protect: the reaffirmation that every state has a
inherent responsibility to protect, and the question is rather whether the ways in reach
this target the particular circumstances; recalling that there is no fixed order in which a pillar to
another, but the various pillars are mutually.

In addition, the SG recall usefully that the objective of the third pillar is not to take the place of state
failed, but to create a credible action and proportionate conditions for the defaulting State may at
again assume this responsibility or to convince the State to exercise this responsibility with regard to its
population.

We also share the opinion of SG that humanitarian action can not in any way be used as
substitute for political action, although it is a crucial component of any "decisive action in time".

Finally, it seems important to note, as does the SG, the Security Council must continue to
meet the requirement flexibly protect people against crimes covered by liability
protect, with all the freedom that gives the Charter.

In conclusion, my delegation thanks the special MM Consultants. Francis Deng and Luck Ed for their
essential contribution to the development of the concept of the responsibility to protect; she wants to Adama
Dieng much success in his new role and assures him of its full support. //