SPEECH BY THE DELEGATION OF CHILE IN THE INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE REPORT OF THE SECRETARY GENERAL
"RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT: A DECISIVE AND TIMELY RESPONSE"

Thank you Mr. President,
I first of all thank the Secretary-General's report "Accountability
Protect: A timely and decisive response ".

My delegation also gratefully acknowledges the work of ex - Asesores
Special for the Prevention of Genocide and Responsibility to Protect,
Messrs. Francis Deng and Ed Luck, respectively, for the excellent work
throughout their mandates. Also, I want to welcome you, Mr. President,
its new high functions and can count on the full support of my delegation.

Mr. President,
My delegation welcomes the report of the SG, which proposes to States
Members a clear guide to using all available tools and
United Nations Charter to deal with a case of crisis in which a
Determined state being committed any of the four crimes that treats
Responsibility to Protect.

Mr. president
As well as the report of the Secretary-General, the three pillars of the
Responsibility to Protect: State responsibility to protect its
civilian population of the aforementioned four crimes, the obligation of the community
international to cooperate with that State when necessary and finally his
duty react so firmly to the commission of such crimes are
feed back and their application is not consecutive, but must apply the
most appropriate according to a given situation and always agree
to the provisions of the UN Charter.

Timely and decisive response of the international community is vital, whether it
under Chapters VI, VII or VIII of the Charter. Without the possibility of such
response, this debate would not be an academic discussion. The answer
It should not necessarily be by use of force. Charter
Organization provides a wide range of possible reactions by using
instrument of peaceful pressure to bring to an outlet in a situation
crisis.

No doubt that prevention is an essential pillar of the responsibility to protect and
It is clear that while the international community more invested in prevention,
consolidate democratic institutions so that they can operate with full respect
human rights, there will be less risk that committed these four
crimes.

However, and unfortunately, these crimes occur and when has not been
possible to avoid them is to stop them necessary and should be applied here, as stated
and report of the Secretary-General, that pillar that is most appropriate to the situation
concrete. In this regard and as noted above, to apply the
Responsibility to Protect is not a requirement consequential application of
pillars. Yes that must implement the measures necessary and fair for that
case offers the Charter itself in Chapters VI, VII and VIII.

When circumstances leave no other alternative than applying the
Chapter VII sanctions and therefore must be authorized by the Council
Security, the main body should be able to reach an agreement and power
adopt appropriate measures. It is regrettable inability to make a decision
when these crimes continue to occur.

Moreover, once it has taken the decision to implement a measure under
Chapter VII, the mandate should be clear and specific and there should be regular reports
members of the Council. This helps to greater transparency and legitimacy
to UN membership.

Finally,
I note the statement by the Secretary-General, referring to the lessons learned
from 2005 on R2P, as regards the role of regional organizations,
particularly as regards to early warning and applying means
prevention.

At this point, my delegation stresses the role that civil society and NGOs
who usually are the first to capture signals that risk
commit these four crimes.

General Assembly Debate Statement: Chile
Unofficial Transcription from webcast
Thank you, Moderator.

I’d like to thank the Secretary General for his important report and also recognize the work that has been done
by the special advisors Dang and Lack for the work that they have done to bring forward this debate on the
concept of the Responsibility to Protect. And also, congratulate you Moderator on your new functions and
show you the support of my country. Finally, I’d like to recognize the contributions made by the panelists in
this debate.

The report of the Secretary General proposes a clear guide to member states to use all existing tools in the
United Nations in order to deal with a crisis where in a given state crimes are being committed that fall under
the Responsibility to Protect heading. As was quite rightly pointed out in the Secretary General’s report these
three pillars: the responsibility of the state to protect its population, the responsibility of the international
community to cooperate when necessary in order to deal with the problem, or finally, the possibility for the
international community be able to react firmly in order to put an end to these crimes. These three pillars are all
interrelated, as the Secretary General said and the implementation of them is not consecutive overtime.

Depending on the situation one pillar might be more relevant from the other, provided that the charter is
respected and Chile fully supports this approach.

The appropriate response of the international community is essential, weather it is according to Article 6, 7, 8,
or 9 of the Charter. This is not an academic discussion here Moderator, the response should not necessary be
the use of force, as Secretary General said, there is a broad range of peaceful instruments for intervention to
ensure that the situation changes course.

However, prevention is an essential part of R2P and it’s clear that the more the international community invests
in democratic institutions and prevention to ensure that human rights are protected; the less risks there will be
that these four crimes are going to be committed. However, unfortunately these crimes continue to be
committed and when it hasn’t been possible to avoid them then we have to put a stop to them. And as the report
of the institute points out the most appropriate pillar should be used for the given situation.

In this respect, I would like to highlight what was said by the Secretary General when he referred to lessons
learned in 2005 with regard to the role that regional organizations should play with regard to early warning and
the implementation of prevention measures, as well as the role that civil society and NGO’s can play. They
usually are the first ones to pick up on signals of risks that these four crimes are about to be committed.

Mr. Moderator when circumstances leave no other alternative than Chapter 7 sanctions to be applied and
therefore should be supported by the Security Council. This main body should be able to reach agreement and
be able to approve appropriate measures, and it’s implementable to see the inability to make a decisions when
these crimes are being committed.

And also, once a state has decided to apply Chapter 7, mandate should be clear and specific, and there should be
regular reports to the members of the Security Council with regard to the conduct of such operations. This will
lead to greater transparency and legitimacy before the members of the General Assembly of the United Nations