General Assembly Debate Statement: China
Unofficial Transcription from webcast
Thank you Mr. Moderator,
The Chinese delegation wishes to congratulate you on assuming the function of the
Special Representative of the SG on genocide.

China supports further discussion in the GA on R2P and the three pillars. China is of the
following three views.

International community where necessary can provide constructive assistance but
in so doing must strictly follow the purposes and principles of the UN Charter in
particular the principles of respecting sovereignty, territorial integrity and noninterference in internal affairs. In so doing the actions must get a mandate from
the council and should be done within the UN framework.

2. The 2005 World Summit Outcome document contains very prudent description of
R2P and stipulates that its applicability is strictly limited to the four R2P crimes:
genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity. No party can
unilaterally expand or interpret this concept or impose a regime change or get
involved in a civil war under the excuse of R2P.

3. China has always stood for the peaceful settlement of disputes. Actions to protect
civilians can only be used after all the peaceful means are exhausted. Actions to
alleviate crisis must be based on the UN framework. If enforcement actions are to
be taken then there must be a council mandate and such actions must be carried
out in prudent manner and on a case-by-case basis.

4. Council resolutions must be strictly and precisely implemented. No party can
unilaterally interpret the concept nor can it take any action beyond the mandate.

Responsibility while Protecting, proposed by Brazil, is of great significance to the
monitoring and enhancement of the implementation of the council resolutions and
is worth further consideration.

5. R2P is a complicated issue, its applicability and the real implementation is still a
controversial issue. China favors further discussion in the GA on this matter.

Before a consensus is reached among the member states the UN should be very
careful and prudent in the promotion and the real implementation of R2P