United Nations General Assembly

Informal interactive dialogue on the
“Report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect:
Timely and decisive response”

New York, 5 September 2012

Statement delivered by
Mr Ioannis Vrailas
Deputy Head of Delegation
Chargé d'affaires a.i.

Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations

Check against delivery

Mr President,
Thank you for giving the floor to the European Union.

At the outset, we would like to thank the UN Secretary-General for his keynote address today
and greet the new Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide Adama Dieng. We also
thank the Secretary-General's two former Special Advisors, Ed Luck and Francis Deng, for
their work,

We appreciate today's GA dialogue which continues the United Nations's regular
consideration of this important concept as it gives us an opportunity to reaffirm strong support
to the Responsibility to Protect and its implementation. The adoption in 2005 of the RtoP
principle and its subsequent elaboration has been a remarkable achievement for the
international community.

The EU thanks the Secretary-General for his report and commends him and the joint office on
the work. As previous ones, the report further clarifies our common understanding of the
concept. We commend the SG for the comprehensive and measured approach taken.

We are grateful to the distinguished panellists for providing interesting insights on the topic.

The EU has a few questions for the panel, but allow me first to outline some general thoughts
and initiatives. Mr President,
We particularly appreciate that the Secretary-General report before us

~ Reaffirms the RtoP concept as enshrined in the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document as
the reference point for our efforts to make prevention and response to atrocities - genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity - a reality on the ground;

- Reminds us that it is indeed the responsibility of each State to protect its populations from
those crimes but also our collective responsibility to prevent and counter mass atrocities if
national authorities are manifestly failing to protect their populations; °

- Recalls the non-sequential and mutually reinforcing nature of measures undertaken as part of
a timely and decisive response;

- Argues that each situation will require a different, tailored mix of tools and approaches;

- Restates that, while careful assessment of the situation, our possibilities for action and
possible undesirable effects are of course necessary, non-action is not_an option and that
action should not be constrained by a set of pre-defined abstract criteria or guidelines;

- Helpfully integrates the contribution made by the Brazilian concept paper on "Responsibility
while Protecting" circulated last year and discussed in an insightful meeting in February.

Mr President,

More specifically, we wish to recall again that the three pillars of RtoP are parallel and finely
balanced, and SG reports in the past have underlined this. Just as there is no automatism to
move from one pillar to the other, there can be neither a prioritization of action under one
pillar over another, nor a chronological sequencing between them, We also recall that the
international community, through the United Nations, has the responsibility to use appropriate
diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful means, to help to protect populations.

If such peaceful means are inadequate and national authorities are manifestly failing to protect
their populations, the international community must be prepared to take collective action, ina
timely and decisive manner, through the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter,
including Chapter VII, on a case-by-case basis and in cooperation with relevant regional
organizations as appropriate.

Moreover, we attach great importance to recalling that pillar 3 of RtoP is more than military
intervention as there are many other non-military coercive measures that the Security Council
could and should put to use, including sanctions and the involvement of the ICC. We all have
an obligation to consider such measures and make use of them in the face of a government’s
failure or unwillingness to exercise its responsibility to protect its population. We also believe that Commissions of Inquiry, fact-finding missions and preventive deployments have an
important role to play.

The application of targeted sanctions and arms embargoes can contribute to the efforts of the
international community to ensure that governments meet their international obligations.

Turning to the situation in Syria that is often on our minds these days and was again debated
by this distinguished body yesterday.

The EU remains gravely concerned by the situation in Syria. The continued intense suffering
of the Syria people is unacceptable and those responsible for crimes committed must be held
to account. The EU calls for united action by all members of the UN Security Council to add
more robust and effective pressure and ensure that there will be serious consequences for
continued non-compliance with its previous decisions. After all, our collective commitment is
and was to agree on ways to prevent and end gross and systematic violations of human rights.

On the humanitarian situation on the ground, last week's briefings in the Security Council by
both the Deputy Secretary General and UN High Commissioner for Refugees confirmed a
sharp deterioration. The General Assembly has been clear in Resolution 66/253 B on what is
required to address this humanitarian urgency. We need to continue to press on all parties to
ensure respect for the protection of civilians and to allow unfettered and safe access for
humanitarian workers, including in conflict zones throughout the country, and to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights law, in this and other comparable situations.

Turning back to the SG report before us, we appreciate that its section IV emphasizes the
issue of partnership, including with other regional organisations.

As set out in last year's debate on the role of regional organisations, the political project that
led to the establishment of the European Union was born as a reaction to the mass atrocities
perpetrated last century on our continent. In this vein, the EU has been a vocal contributor to
the GA debates on different aspects of RtoP as well as an active partner for the United
Nations in the implementation of the concept both at global level and as regional organisation.

As partner of the UN, we exchange information and analysis aimed at early warning. We are
cooperating closely, including on desk-to-desk level. We ensure complementarity in our
mediation and electoral assistance efforts as well as in crisis management. Given the
centrality of prevention from the EU perspective, we have long mainstreamed conflict
prevention into our cooperation with third partners and engage in the preventive deployment
of EU missions. Moreover, our development policies aim at addressing the root causes of
insecurity and division. We are also an active contributor to the Peace Building Commission. As mass atrocities are more likely to be committed in an environment of weak protection of
human rights and bad governance, the EU, through its recently adopted "Human Rights
package" will further strengthen its human rights promotion and defence activities, including
through support to civil society, and assist building democratic, transparent and effective
institutions and independent justice systems.

Mr. President,

In closing, the EU would like to reaffirm its commitment to cooperate further with the UN,
including with the new Special Adviser for Genocide Prevention and with the successor of Ed
Luck, once appointed.

May we now submit the following questions to the Panelists?

1, Underlining the centrality of prevention: please elaborate how the United National and
Member States can further develop the measures already mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report, namely early warning, assessment and action; mediation and dialogue; preventive
diplomacy?

2. Civil society networks and NGOs are often the first to pick up signs of nascent RtoP
situations and should hence be part of our overall approach to the situation. What could the

UN do to benefit more from their insights and cooperation?

3. As you will be aware, a UNGA High-Level meeting on the Rule of Law is currently being
prepared — where do you see linkages and synergies to the rule of law agenda?

Thank you