REPUBLIC OF CÔTE D'IVOIRE

INTERACTIVE DIALOGUE ON THE REPORT
SECRETARY GENERAL
ON RESPONSIBILITY TO PROTECT

THIRD PILLAR:
"WAY TO RESPOND PROMPT AND DECISIVE"

DECLARATION OF
S.E.M Youssourou Bamba
AMBASSADOR
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF IVORY COAST WITH THE UNITED NATIONS
New York

New York, September 5, 2012

Check against delivery The interactive dialogue that brings us together today, chose to focus on the 3 °
pillar of the principle of the Responsibility to Protect (R2P), namely, the resolute reaction
timely international community.

This choice seems to us much about, given the recent events I'actualité,
including the situation in Syria and North Mali, to name but two examples,
that reinforce the relevance of the reasons that led the Heads of State and
Governments at the 2005 World Summit, affirming this principle of
"Responsibility to Protect" (R2P), in accordance with paragraphs 138 and 139 of
Document said top end.

From our viewpoint, the R2P had been too long hidden, while the reality
it represents, namely 4, protect populations against genocide, crimes
war, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against | humanity permeates
all conflict situations.

Recent developments reflecting some visibility we see this principle
4 should our view aim 4 incorporate that principle at regional and international level
in the architecture of the systems of collective security, and mechanisms of
preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention, management and resolution of conflicts, peacekeeping
peace and peacebuilding.

Regarding the case of Africa particulisrement West include Example
pioneer of the intervention of the ECOWAS force (ECOMOG) in the first conflict
Liberia in 1990, akin perfectly to the operationalization of the 3rd pillar of the
R2P.

Indeed, the initiative to send a West African multinational force to restore
order in Liberia was a reaction to an immediate emergency, to
put an end to mass atrocities that were going to be committed. This
presence of ECOWAS has certainly helped to facilitate negotiations in the
United Nations Security Council and the deployment of peacekeepers to Liberia
United Nations.

Subsequently, the legal framework for these interventions was organized by the adoption in 1991
the declaration of principles Abuja on fundamental human rights
Citizens of ECOWAS, and in 1999 by the establishment of the Mechanism 10.

prevention, management, settlement of conflicts, peacekeeping and security
in the sub-region.

This mechanism of collective security institutionalizes the intervention framework of the
ECOWAS through the establishment of the Force ECOWAS Standby, or ECOWAS Standby
Force (ESF).

The Mechanism was completed in 2001 by the Additional Protocol on Democracy and
Good Governance, and in 2008 by the Conflict Prevention Framework
ECOWAS.

It should be recalled that ECOWAS also intervened in Sierra Leone in
1997 in Guinea Bissau in 1998, Cote d'Ivoire in 2002, is deployed in actucllement
Guinea Bissau, and expects at this time [authorization of the Security Council for a
deployment in Mali.

Regarding | operationalization of 3 "pillar of R2P relatively in case of crisis

Cête in ivory, the reference point is the resolution 1975 (2011).

Indeed, on 30 March 2011, the United Nations Security Council, deeply concerned
by the rise of violence in Ivory Cête due to heavy weapons massive use
by the regime in decline of the former President, has decided to face a strong response
the situation kept deteriorating, through the adoption of resolution 1975 (2011)
which takes into account the following objectives:

strengthening the mandate of? ONUCTI, with a specific mandate to protect
civilians in danger;

taking sanctions against Ivorians who, while refusing to
recognize the election results, incite to hatred and violence;

Vinterdiction the use of heavy weapons against civilians;
The intervention of the International Criminal Court in order to track down the perpetrators
of massive human rights in Ivory Cête.

6, 7 and 9 April 2011, have seen an unprecedented escalation of the camp attacks
Vancien President, 4 both against civilian populations, the Government Sigge
legitimate and the siege of UNOCI.

Faced with these unacceptable actions, including I'utilisation continuous heavy weapons to
the civilian population and the peacekeepers and the attack against the headquarters of
legitimate government, the UN Secretary General was forced to avoid
genocide in Cete d'Ivoire, to instruct the Mission 4, after consultations
Member States and technical services, to take all necessary measures
to impede the use 4 weapons, in accordance with resolutions 1975 (2011)
1962 (2010) of the Security Council. 15.

Thus, April 9, 2011, around 17:00 Abidjan, UNOCI has launched a
military operation helps us prevent I'utilisation heavy weapons threatening security
civilian population of Abidjan and that of all civilian and military personnel of
UN in Ivory thugs. The French forces Licorne have provided support
has the necessary? ONUCTI accordance with paragraph 17 of resolution 1962 (2010)
security Council.

April 11, 2011, former President was screeching halt and the democratically elected President
after certification by? UN results of presidential I'élection, could die at
assume the fullness of all its prerogatives of the President of the Republic of thugs
ivory.

The post-election crisis that lasted months cing, caused 3,000 deaths, 1 million
IDPs and 500,000 refugees.

In conclusion, I would like to make two points:

First, side view of the fact that cases of setting ceuvre of 3 "pillar
R2P are undoubtedly the result of | failure found at the two pillars
earlier, it is important to emphasize at the end of crises and I'éducation
Awareness has R2P has all levels of society and at the particuligrement
armed elements in the context of particular SSR and DDR; significant support from
the international community is necessary in this regard;

Second, since it is the regional and subregional organizations
who are the first on the ground when a conflict breaks out, they have a duty to
appropriating the principle of R2P and the conerétiser in their respective mechanisms.

prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and in their systems of safety
collective. In this regard, the leadership shown by the Arab League in crisis
Libya and the situation in Syria, as | 'constant commitment of ECOWAS
all theaters of conflict in West Africa, including those currently underway
Guinea Bissau and Mali, are encouraging more ways than one.

Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing the conviction that the same
UN Secretary-General to state that the principle of Responsibility
protection arrived at maturity and that the international community must take ownership
to avoid the occurrence of a situation similar to that currently underway in Syria..

General Assembly Debate Statement: H.E. Mr. Youssoufou Bamba, Permanent Representative
of the Mission of Cote d’Ivoire to the United Nations.

Unofficial Transcription from webcast
[Translation does not begin for a while]…these two examples which strengthen the reasons which have led the
heads of state and governments during the global summit in 2005 to reaffirm this principle of the Responsibility
to Protect pursuant to paragraphs 138 and 139 of the final document of the summit. From our point of view the
Responsibility to Protect was for too long passed over in silence whereas the need to protect the populations
against genocide, crimes of war, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity, all of this was omnipresent in
conflict situations. Recent developments which reflect greater visibility which we have noted regarding these
principles should, in our view, aim to incorporate these principles both at a regional as well as international
levels into the architecture of the collective security systems as well as the preventive diplomacy, conflict
settlement management, prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building mechanisms. For my statement I would
like to focus on two specific examples. Firstly we have the example of West Africa and then we have the very
specific example of my country Cote d’Ivoire.

Now, turning to West Africa specifically one can look at the pioneering example of the intervention by the
ECOWAS forces ECOMOG during the first conflict in Liberia in 1990 which fits in perfectly with the
operationalization of the third pillar of the Responsibility to Protect. Indeed, the initiative to deploy a West
African multinational force to restore order in Liberia was a response to an immediate emergency situation and
putting an end to mass atrocities which were being committed. This ECOWAS presence has contributed to
facilitating negotiations within the framework of the Security Council or the United Nations followed by the
deployment of UN Blue Helmets to Liberia a little later on. Subsequently the legal framework for these
interventions was organized in the case of ECOWAS by the adoption in 1991 of the Boutra principles
declaration on the fundamental human rights of ECOWAS’s citizens and in 1999 by the setting up of the
conflict settlement management and prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building mechanisms. This collective
security mechanism institutionalized the framework for ECOWAS’s intervention for creation of the ECOWAS
Standby Force also known as ESF. These mechanisms were finalized in 2001 by the additional protocol on the
democracy and good governance and in 2008 by the framework for the prevention of conflicts by ECOWAS. It
behooves me to recall here that ECOWAS also intervened in Sierra Leone in 1997 and Guinea-Bissau in 1998,
in Cote d’Ivoire in 2002 and is currently deployed in Guinea-Bissau and is awaiting the Security Council’s
authorization for deployment to Mali.

The second example is the specific case of Cote d’Ivoire. Regarding this case a third pillar of the Responsibility
to Protect did apply related to the implementation of resolution 1975. On March 30, 2011 the Security Council
of the United Nations, concerned by the growing violence in Cote d’Ivoire resulting from the mass use of heavy
weapons by the torturing regime of the former president decided to come up with a strong response when faced
with the responsibility which continued to deteriorate through the adoption of the resolution 1975 which
contains the following objectives. Firstly, the strengthening of the mandate of UNOCI with a specific mandate
for the protection of civilian populations in danger. Secondly, the imposition of sanctions against Ivoirian
individuals who, while refusing to recognize the results of the vote, decided instead to incite violence and
hatred. Thirdly the prohibition of the use of heavy weapons against civilian populations and fourthly the
intervention of the ICC to prosecute and bring to justice the perpetrators of massive violations of human rights
in Cote d’Ivoire. On the 6, 7 and 9 of April, 2011 witness an unprecedented escalation of attacks against the
camp of the former president against the seat of the legitimate government and the headquarters of UNOCI.

Faced with these unacceptable actions including the continued use of heavy weapons against civilian
populations and the Blue Helmets as well as the attack against the headquarters of a legitimate government, the
Gulf Hotel, the Secretary General of the United Nations was forced to prevent a genocide to take place in Cote
d’Ivoire, to order the mission following consultations with member states and the technical services of the
United Nations, to take all necessary steps to prevent the use of such weapons pursuant to resolutions 1975
dated 2011 and 1962 [dated] 2010 to the Security Council. On the 9th of April, 2011, 5:00 PM Abidjan time
UNOCI launched a military operation to prevent the use of heavy weapons threatening the security of civilian
populations in Abidjan and all the civilian and military personnel of the United Nations in Cote d’Ivoire. The
French Legion Forces leant the necessary support to UNOCI pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 1962 of the
Security Council. Finally on 11 April 2011 the former president was arrested and the democratically elected
president, Mr. Alassane Ouattara, this following UN certification of the presidential elections, was able to fully
assume the prerogatives of the office of the president of Cote d’Ivoire. This post-electoral crisis which lasted
five months claimed 3,000 lives, 1 million IDP’s and 500,000 refugees.

With conclusion two comments. Firstly, given the fact that cases of the implementation of the third pillar of the
Responsibility to Protect are quite clearly the result of the failure of the two previous pillars, we must focus in
post-crisis situations on education and awareness-raising regarding these concepts in all elements of society
especially armed elements within the framework inter alia of SSR and DDR. At both these levels significant
support by the international community is necessary. Secondly, given the fact that its regional and sub-regional
organizations which are first on the ground when a conflict erupts they must apply the Responsibility to Protect
principle and to implement it as part of their respective mechanisms for the settled management of conflicts as
well as their collective security arrangements. The leadership shown by the League of Arab states during the
crisis in Libya served just as the ongoing ECOWAS commitment in conflicts in Western Africa including those
currently underway in Guinea-Bissau and Mali are encouraging. And finally I would like to conclude my
statement by echoing the Secretary General of the United Nations and stating that the Responsibility to Protect
has finally come of age and the international community must apply it to prevent the emergence of situations
similar to the current one in Syria. Thank you