Only against delivery

 

 

LUXEMBOURG

Statement by HE Ms. Sylvie Lucas
Ambassador, Permanent Representative

informal interactive dialogue of the General Assembly

Report of the Secretary-General on the responsibility to protect:
Responding to prompt and decisive manner

New York, September 5, 2012

 

Statement by H.E. Ms. Sylvie Lucas
Ambassador, Permanent Representative

Informal interactive dialogue of the General Assembly

Report of the Secretary-Genera! on the responsibility to protect:
Timely and decisive response

New York, September 5 ", 2012

Candidate for the Security Consell

2073-2074

Candidate iron the Security Council Mr. Moderator,

I congratulate the President of General Assembly for organizing this fourth dialogue
Interactive Informal UN General Assembly gives us Voccasion of
discuss the responsibility to protect a time of 4 Vactualité 4 shows how this
ptincipe adopted in 2005 remains relevant. Let me also join previous
speakers in thanking the Secretary General for his very comprehensive report and Pintervention
qvil has spoken this morning and welcoming you, Mr. Dieng, as
new Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

The Laxemboutg 4 fully supports the declaration of European PUnion. Let me
highlight three elements 4 national title.

1. The unprecedented ctise prevailing in Syria since March 4 2011 shows how it may be
1a difficult for international community to respond in a prompt and decisive manner "when
national authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations against the
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. " this crisis
including the human toll is unfortunately heavier each day should not be ignored. But she
must not make us forget that derniéze year, the Security Council has been able to remember
Fagon decisive States of their responsibility to protect their populations, particularly in the case
Libya, the Cete d'Ivoire and Yemen.

2. To make further progress, it is healthy that we may lead a sincéte debate at the United Nations
as we do today, taking into account the criticisms that have been issued 4
Yégard of the way in translating the responsibility to protect in operational terms. The initiative
the "protection officer", "responsibility while protecting", launched by Brazil
September 2011 is the most visible reflection of the concern that we all share I believe, and that
is a concern common sense: the principle of the responsibility to protect should not
conttibuer has further endanger populations that one specifically looking for
prtotéger. The legon that s * 4 requires us is QWIL be prompt and is maniéte
decisive, because the more one differs more intervention is heavy and painful for all parties
concetnées. Prevention is always better. But to be effective, prevention requires
an early warning system involving 4 Pexpertise benefit and information of all parties
involved: the United Nations system, regional and sub-regional organizations,
Member States much Sir, civil society, and same people, 4 "heute transmission
instant of information and mobilization through social networks. Prevention requires
4 as the use wisely deterrence measures such as ceuvre Started
International Commissions of survey or finding missions facts or threat
Pune referral to the International Criminal Court.

3. Finally, I would leverage my experience as President of Training
Guinea Commission of peacebuilding. To me, if the same Commission
Peacebuilding is not mentioned as such in the report of the Secretary-General, she

1 can usefully contribute 4 for Implementation of the principle of responsibility to protect
reducing the risk of return of violence in a post-conflict context. The Guinea Training
especially following closely the progress achieved in for Implementation of
recommendations of the International Commission of survey designed to investigate
events of 28 September 2009 to stage Conakty.

Mr. Moderator,

Since the 2005 World Summit, Luxembourg and supported Pélaboration for Implementation
the principle of the responsibility to protect to avoid recurrence of ctimes against humanity
such as those committed in the last century, particularly on the European continent. We
I have 4 memory of millions of victims of past crimes to perfect this principle,
Overall, as a United Nations.

Je vous remercie de votte attention. Unofficial translation
Mtr. Moderator,

I would like to salute the initiative of the General Assembly to organise this fourth informal
interactive dialogue of the UN General Assembly, which gives us the opportunity to discuss the
responsibility to protect at a moment where current events show how relevant this principle,
which was adopted in 2005, remains. Allow me also to join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General for his very comprehensive report and the intervention he made this morning,
as well as in welcoming you, Mr. Dieng, as the new Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide.

Luxembourg fully associates itself with the statement by the European Union. I would like to
underline three elements in a national capacity.

1. The unprecedented crisis prevailing in Syria since March 2011 shows how difficult it can be
for the international community to respond in a timely and decisive manner when “national
authorities are manifestly failing to protect their populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and ctimes against humanity”. As its death toll unfortunately grows heavier day by day,
this crisis cannot be ignored. But it should not make us forget either that, last year, the Security
Council has been able to compellingly remind States of their responsibility to protect their
populations, notably in the case of Libya, Céte d'Ivoire and Yemen.

2. In order to make further progress, it is healthy to hold an honest debate at the United Nations,
as we ate doing today, and take into account the criticisms levelled at the manner in which the
responsibility to protect has been “operationalised”. The initiative on “responsibility while
protecting”, launched by Brazil in September 2011, is the most visible manifestation of the
concetn which I believe we all shate, and which is a common sense concern: the application of
the principle of the responsibility to protect must not contribute to endangering even further the
populations that one seeks to protect. The important lesson to be learned in our view is that we
must act in a timely and decisive manner, since the longer we wait, the more dramatic and costly
to all concerned the eventual intervention will be. Prevention is always preferable. But in ordet to
be effective, prevention requires an early-warning system which draws upon the expertise and
information available to all involved patties: the United Nations System, regional and sub-
regional organisations, Member States of course, civil society and even individuals, in a day and
age where information is transmitted instantaneously and mobilisation takes place through social
networks. Prevention also requites the appropriate use of deterring measures, like the
implementation of international commissions of inquity ot fact-finding missions or the threat of
referrals to the International Criminal Court.

3. Finally, I would like draw from my experience as Chairperson of the Guinea Configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC. I believe that, even if the PBC is not named as such in the
Secretary-General’s report, it can usefully contribute to the implementation of the principle of
the responsibility to protect, by reducing the tisk of a return to violence in a post-conflict setting.

The Guinea Configuration attentively follows the progress made in the implementation of the

3 fecommendations of the international commission of inquiry which was mandated to investigate
the events of 28 September 2009 in the stadium of Conakry.

Mr. Moderator,

Since the 2005 World Summit, Luxembourg has supported the development and implementation
of the principle of the responsibility to protect in order to prevent the recurrence of crimes
against humanity like those committed in the past century, notably on the European continent.

We owe it to the memory of the millions of victims of the crimes of the past to perfect this
principle, together, as United Nations