Statement by Ambassador
R. P. of Spain, Fernando Arias
Informal Interactive Dialogue of the General Assembly on the Report of the
Secretary-General on the Responsibility to Protect:
decisive and timely response
05.09.2012
Thank you very much, Mr. President. I wish my first words of
recognition of the work performed by the previous Special Advisory
Secretary General for the Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Edward Luck and the
Prevention of Genocide, Francis Deng. My congratulations, Mr. President, for your
recent appointment as Secretary General Advisor for the Prevention of the
Genocide. I wish you the greatest success in management and know you can count
with the full support of Spain.

Spain fully associates itself with the intervention of the European Union and its
national capacity you want to add some considerations.

Spain strongly supports the concept of responsibility to protect such
As he outlined by the Heads of State and Government at the World Summit
2005, and as has been defined in the successive reports
General secretary. In the same way Spain has supported instances
Relevant United Nations system when invoked this principle
to urge States to fulfill the responsibility that the exercise of the
sovereignty entails.

Today mentioned the concept of sovereignty as responsibility. Well
However, the exercise of "irresponsible sovereignty" and calls for decisive action
timely by the international community. I will echo the words of the
Secretary General to the talk today about the suffering of the Syrian people: inaction
It is not an option. Inaction erodes the faith of our citizens in the system
United Nations.

Mr President, as we have seen during the debate, although the concept of
RtoP is fully seated still need to forge a consensus on
methods of their application. It is important to recognize the different
sensitivities of Member States or regional groups. In this regard, both the
initiative launched by Brazil, Responsalbilidad to the Protect, as the report of the
Secretary General brings clarity: RtoP principles must be applied
maximum consistency and uniformity. However, the choice of instruments
employees, not excluding a priori any of those Nations Charter
United it makes available to the international community, will depend on the
specific circumstances.

According to these criteria my delegation considers, Mr. President,
where there has been invoked the concept of RtoP, as in the case of Libya, such
As the distinguished delegate recognized Libya this morning, or the case of Costa
Ivory brilliantly exposed by Ambassador Bamba, your application must be
seen as a success of the United Nations and the international community.

It is essential to recognize that the invocation of the third pillar, ie the
timely and decisive subject of our discussion today, contains a response
wide range of options. It behooves us to reflect to define between all
more clearly the terms, conditions, requirements, possibilities, degree

execution and as well mentioned the Secretary General Simoniovic, the
consequences of the chosen option. It would be wrong to limit debate on the
instruments to use coercive measures, and within these the
military dimension: it distorts the concept of RtoP
Among these measures Spain attached particular importance to diplomacy
preventive and mediation obvious example of the correlation between the pillars
second and third.

In this regard let me recall that during the ministerial week 67
AG, on 28 September, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
Spain, with his Moroccan counterpart, will make the launch of the initiative
for mediation in the region of the Mediterranean. This initiative, which was announced
within the framework of the 66th AG and has the participation of the General Secretariat,
It has the vocation to the development of national capacities in
mediation and coordination between the various actors in the Mediterranean.

Finally I would like to ask the panelists feedback on two
aspects of the report that I consider particularly interesting and yet not have
been the subject of much attention during the day:
First, most dialogue with civil society, that enriches the debate and
can facilitate early warning and effective response.

And finally the leading role of humanitarian agencies, whose action without
But it should not be a substitute for political action itself RtoP, not
You are confused with it. Unlike this, the humanitarian response is governed
by own principles of humanity, impartiality, independence and neutrality and
its effectiveness depends on humanitarian space is guaranteed.

Statement of Ambassador P.R. of Spain Fernando Arias González
Informal Interactive dialogue of the General Assembly about the Secretary General’s
report on Responsibility to Protect
Thank you Mr. President. I´d like my first words to be of appreciation for the task
carried out by the previous UN Secretary-General Special Advisers for the
Responsibility to Protect, Mr. Edward Luck and for the Prevention of Genocide ,
Francis Deng; My congratulations, Mr. President, for your recent appointment as UN
Secretary-General Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide. I wish you great
success in your management and rest assured that you count with Spain’s total support.

Spain associates itself entirely with the EU’s statement, and in its national competency
would like to add the following appreciations.

Spain firmly supports the concept of Responsibility to Protect just as it was delineated
by Heads of state during the 2005 World Summit and in successive reports by the
Secretary-General. In the same way, Spain has supported the UN system’s pertinent
instances whenever this principle has been invoked to exhort states to fulfil the
responsibility that the exercise of sovereignty implies.

The concept of sovereignty as a responsibility has been mentioned today. The exercise
of a “responsible sovereignty” demands decisive and timely action on the behalf of the
international community. Echoing the words of the Secretary General in reference to the
suffering of the Syrian people, inaction is not an option. Inaction erodes the faith of our
citizens in the United Nations system.

Mr. President, as seen during the course of this debate, even if the concept of
Responsibility to protect is completely settled, it’s still necessary to forge consensus
about the methods used in its implementation. It’s important to consider the different
sensibilities of member states and regional groups. In this direction, both the Brazilian
initiative Responsabilidad al Proteger, and the Secretary General’s report provide
clarity: the principles of R2P must be applied with maximum coherence and uniformity.

Nonetheless, the choice of instruments, without excluding any of the ones the UN
Charter puts at the international community’s disposition, will depend on each case’s
specific circumstances.

It’s essential to recognize that the invocation of the third pillar, in other words, a
decisive and timely action, the object of today’s debate, compiles a wide range of
options. It’s up to us to ponder and define with more clarity the conditions, modalities,
requirements, possibilities, degree of execution, and as has been adequately mentioned
by Subsecretary General Simoniovic, the consequences of the option of choice. It would
be wrong to limit the debate about instruments to be used solely to coercive measures,
and amongst these to the military dimension: this distorts de concept of R2P.

Amongst these measures, Spain grants special importance to preventive diplomacy and
mediation, an evident example of the existing correlation between the second and third
pillars.

In this instance, allow me to remind you that during the ministerial week of the 67th
General Assembly, next September 28th the Spanish Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, together with his Moroccan homologue, will launch the initiative for
mediation in the Mediterranean region. Said initiative, which was announced in the
frame of the 66th General Assembly and counts with the participation of the Secretariat,
has a vocation to develop national mediation capacities and to coordinate the different
actors in the Mediterranean scope.

To end my speech I would like to request the panellists’ comments regarding two
aspects of the report which I consider of particular interest but that have nonetheless not
received particular attention today.

Firstly, a greater interlocution with civil society will enrich the debate and may facilitate
early and effective response.

Secondly, I would like to highlight the role of humanitarian agencies, whose actions
must nonetheless not be a substitute nor be mistaken with political action, which
belongs to R2P. Humanitarian response is governed by the principles of humanity,
impartiality, independence and neutrality and its efficiency depends on the guarantee of
the humanitarian space