SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM
MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
866 UNITED NATIONS PLAZA
SUITE 435
New York, NY 10017

 

 

STATEMENT
by Ambassador Pham Vinh Quang
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
at the General Assembly Interactive Dialogue on Responsibility to Protect
New York, 5 September 2012

Mr. President,

At the outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Mr. President for
convening today’s informal dialogue on the Responsibility to Protect (Rto2P) and to the
HE. Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for the Report
“Responsibility to protect: timely and decisive response” which again shows their
constant concerns for issues of important interests to the international community

Mr. President,

We can all agree on the common goal of preventing and fighting against genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. Viet Nam strongly condemns
such crimes and is always ready to cooperate with the international community in the
fight against these crimes.

We all also agree that states have the primary responsibility to protect their own
citizens from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, which
conforms to the fundamental principles of international law, especially those of sovereign
equality and political independence of states. Realities throughout the world show that
the key to the effective and sustainable efforts against these crimes resides in national
judicial systems and implementation measures.

In carrying its primary responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, states need assistance and
cooperation from the international community. For that matter, the 2005 World Summit
Outcome Document points out that “the international community should, as appropriate,
encourage and help States to exercise this responsibility”. International assistance would
be most effective and sustainable on the basis of the needs and wishes of the people of countries concerned and in accordance with the UN Charter and principles of
international law. In this regard, it is immensely important to promote education and
public awareness and assist states to strengthen its capacity in preventing and
circumventing the occurrence of, or the incitement to commit such crimes.

It is equally important to strengthen the various aspects of the international legal
human rights and humanitarian instruments which prescribe responsibilities at both
national and international levels. The strengthening of the human rights treaty body
system is a welcome process in this direction.

As we discuss these issues at the United Nations, we should always be guided by
the overriding purpose of the organization, that is “to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.” War and conflict also cause untold suffering to people. Hence it is
the role of the related fundamental principles of international law about the promotion of
peace, friendship and about the use of force as regulated under the UN Charter. We
believe that measures undertaken by the international community should be considered
from these perspective.

Reality and past discussions have shown that this important issue deserves further
consideration and deliberation. Viet Nam highly appreciates the research carried out by
the Secretary-General, as well as the comments and proposal presented in the report. Viet
Nam is always ready to participate in future deliberative discussion so that we can reach a
common ground on this issue